Introduction to the Python Fundamentals course

Introduction

Hello, and welcome to the first module of the Python Fundamentals course. My name is Austin Bingham, and over a series of modules I and Robert Smallshire will be guiding you through the basics of the Python programming language. Python is a big language, and a single course can't possibly cover everything there is to know, but this course will serve you well as a solid foundation for really mastering Python. In this module, we'll give you a high-level overview of the Python language, what it is, and what's so great about it. We'll also give you a bird's eye view of the rest of this course so that you'll have an idea of what's to come.

Python Promo

First, what's so great about Python? Why do you want to learn it? There are lots of good answers to those questions. One is that Python is powerful. The Python language is expressive and productive. It comes with a great standard library, and it's the center of a huge universe of wonderful third-party libraries. With Python you can build everything from simple scripts to complex applications, you can do it quickly, you can do it safely, and you can do it with fewer lines of code than you might think possible. But that's just part of what makes Python great. Another is that Python is wonderfully open. It's open source, so you can get to know every aspect of it if you want. At the same time, Python is hugely popular and has a great community to support you when you run into problems. This combination of openness and large user base means that almost anyone from casual programmers to professional software developers can engage with the language at the level they need. Another benefit of a large user base is that Python is showing up in more and more places. You may be wanting to learn Python simply because it's the language of some technology you want to use, and this is not surprising. Many of the most popular web and scientific packages in the world are written in Python. But for many people these reasons take backseat to something more important. Python is fun. Python's expressive readable style, quick edit and run development cycle, and batteries included philosophy mean that you can sit down and enjoy writing code rather than fighting compilers and thorny syntax. And Python will grow with you. As your experiments become prototypes and your prototypes become products, Python makes the experience of writing software not just easier, but truly enjoyable. In the words of Randall Munroe, "Come join us. Programming is fun again."

Course Structure

This course is broken up into 10 separate modules. The modules build on one another, so unless you've already had some exposure to Python you'll need to follow them in order. We'll start with getting Python installed onto your system and orienting you a bit. We'll then cover language elements, features, idioms, and libraries all driven by working examples that you'll be able to build along with the lecture. We're firm believers that you'll learn more by doing than just by watching, so we encourage you to run the examples yourself. By the end of the course, you'll know the fundamentals of the Python language. You'll also know how to use third-party libraries, and you'll know the basics of developing them yourself. We'll even show you how to package up your code to make it easier for others to use what you have written. The course modules are: One, Getting Started, where we cover installing Python, look at some of the basic Python tools, and cover the core elements of the language and syntax. Two, Strings and Collections, where we look at some of the fundamental complex data types, stings, byte sequences, lists, and dictionaries. Three, Modularity, where we look at the tools Python has for structuring your code such as functions and modules. Four, Built-in Types and the Object Model, where we examine Python's type system and object system in detail and where we develop a strong sense of Python's reference semantics. Five, Collection Types, where we go into more depth on some of the Python collection types, as well as introduce a few more. Six, Handling Exceptions, where we learn about Python's exception handling system and the central role that exceptions play in the language. Seven, Comprehensions, Iterables, and Generators, where we explore the elegant, pervasive, and powerful sequence-oriented parts of the Python language such as comprehensions and generator functions. Eight, Defining New Types with Classes, where we'll cover developing your own complex data types in Python using classes to support object-oriented programming. Nine, Files and Resource Management, where we'll look at how to work with files in Python and where we'll cover the tools Python has for resource management. Finally ten, Shipping Working and Maintainable Code, where we'll show you how to use Python's testing, debugging, and code distribution facilities to produce code that works and can be used by others.

Python Overview, Part 1

So, what is Python? Simply put, Python is a programming language. It was initially developed by Guido Van Rossom in the late 1980's in the Netherlands. Guido continues to be actively involved in guiding the development and evolution of the language so much so that he's been given the title Benevolent Dictator for Life, or more commonly BDFL. Python is developed as an open source project and is free to download and use as you wish. The non-profit Python Software Foundation manages Python's intellectual property and plays a strong role in promoting the language and in some cases funding its development. On a technical level, Python is a strongly typed language in the sense that every object in the language has a definite type, and there's generally no way to circumvent that type. At the same time, Python is dynamically typed meaning that there's no type checking of your code prior to running it. This is in contrast to statically typed languages like C++ or Java where a compiler does a lot of type checking for you rejecting programs, which misuse objects. Ultimately, the best description of the Python type system is that it uses duck typing where an object's suitability for a context is only determined at runtime. We'll cover this in more detail in Module 8. Python is a general purpose programming language. It's not intended for use in any particular domain or environment, but instead can be fruitfully used in a wide variety of tasks. There are of course some areas where it's less suitable than others, for example, in extremely time sensitive or memory constrained environments, but for the most part Python is as flexible and adaptable as many modern languages and more so than most. Python is an interpreted language. This is a bit of a myth statement technically because Python is normally compiled into a form of byte code before it's executed. However, this compilation happens invisibly, and the experience of using Python is one of immediately executing code without a noticeable compilation phase. This lack of an interruption between editing and running is one of the great joys of working with Python. What we see here is the development of a simple Hello World program that goes from being a very simple print statement to being a function, to being a function that takes a parameter, to being a function that takes a parameter that's drawn from the command line. The syntax of Python is designed to be clear, readable, and expressive. Unlike many popular languages, Python uses whitespace to delimit code blocks and in the process does away with reams of unnecessary parentheses while enforcing a universal layout. This means that all Python looks alike in important ways, and you can learn to read Python very quickly. At the same time, Python's expressive syntax means that you get a lot of meaning into a single line of code. This expressive, highly readable code means that Python maintenance is relatively easy. What we're watching here is the development of a simple word counting function. As you can see, the function is easy to read even if you don't know the specifics of Python syntax. There are multiple implementations of the Python language. The original, and still by far the most common implementation, is written in C. This version is commonly referred to as C Python. When someone talks about running Python, it's normally safe to assume that they are talking about C Python, and this is the implementation that we'll be using for this course. Other implementations of Python include Jython, which is written to target the Java virtual machine; Iron Python, which targets the .NET runtime; and pypy, which is written in a specialized subset of Python called RPython. These implementations generally trail behind C Python, which is considered to the standard for the language. Much of what you will learn in this course will apply to all of these implementations. There are two important versions of the Python language in common use right now, Python 2 and Python 3. These two versions represent changes in some key elements of the language, and code written for one will not generally work for the other unless you take special precautions. Python 2 is older and more well established than Python 3, but Python 3 addresses some known shortcomings in the older version. Python 3 is the definite future of Python, and you should use it if at all possible. While there are some critical differences between Python 2 and 3, most of the fundamentals of the two versions are the same. If you learn one, most of what you know transfers cleanly to the other. In this course we'll be teaching Python 3, but we'll point out important differences between the versions when necessary.

Python Overview, Part 2

Beyond being a programming language, Python comes with a powerful and broad standard library. Part of the Python philosophy is batteries included meaning that you can use Python for many complex real world tasks out-of-the-box with no need to install third-party packages. This is not only extremely convenient, but it means that it's easier to get started using Python using interesting engaging examples, something we aim for in this course. Another great effect of the batteries included approach is that it means that many scripts, even non- trivial ones, can be run immediately on any Python installation. This removes the common annoying barrier to installing software that you face with some languages. The standard library has a generally high level of good documentation. APIs are well documented, and the modules often have good narrative descriptions with quick start guides, best practice information, and so forth. The standard library documentation is always available online at python.org, and you can also install it locally if you need to. As the standard library is such an important part of Python, we'll be covering parts of it throughout this course. Even so, we won't be covering more than a small fraction of it, so you're encouraged to explore it on your own. Finally, no description of Python would be complete without mentioning that to many people Python represents a philosophy for writing code. Principles of clarity and readability are part of what it means to write correct or pythonic code. It's not always what pythonic means in all circumstances, and sometimes there may be no single correct way to write something. But the fact that the Python community is concerned about issues like simplicity, readability, and explicitness means that Python code tends to be more-- well, beautiful. Many of Python's principles are embodied in the so-called Zen of Python. The Zen isn't a hard and fast set of rules, but rather a set of guidelines or touchstones to keep in mind when coding. When you find yourself trying to decide between several courses of action, these principles can often give you a nudge in the right direction. We'll be highlighting elements of The Zen of Python throughout this course. We think Python is a great language, and we're excited to help you get started with it. By the time you get through this course, you'll be able to write substantial Python programs, and you'll be able to read even more complex ones. More importantly, you'll have the foundation you need to go out and discover all the more advanced topics in the language, and hopefully we'll get you excited enough about Python to do so. Python is a big language with a huge ecosystem of software built in and around it, and it can be a real adventure to discover everything it has to offer. So, welcome to Python! We'll see you in the next module.

Getting Starting With Python 3

Introduction

Welcome to the Python Fundamentals course by Robert Smallshire and Austin Bingham. My name is Robert Smallshire, and I'll be presenting this Getting Started module of the Python Fundamentals course. In this module we'll cover obtaining and installing Python on your system for Windows, Ubuntu Linux, and Mac OS X. We'll write some basic Python code and become acquainted with the essentials of Python programming culture such as The Zen of Python, although never forgetting the origins of the name of the language. There are two major versions of the Python language, Python 2, which is the widely deployed legacy language, and Python 3, which is the present and future of the language. Most Python code will work without modification between the last version of Python 2, which is Python 2.7, and recent versions of Python 3 such as Python 3.3. However, there are some key differences, and in a strict sense the languages are incompatible. We'll be using Python 3.3 for this course, but we'll point out key differences with Python 2 as we go. It's also very likely that this being a fundamentals course everything we present will apply to future versions of Python 3, so don't be afraid to try those as they become available. Before we can start programming in Python, we need to get ahold of a Python environment. Python is a highly portable language available on all major operating systems. You'll be able to complete this course on Windows, Mac, or Linux, and the only major section where we diverge into platform specifics is coming right up as we install Python 3. As we cover the three platforms, feel free to skip over the sections which aren't relevant for you.

Installing Python 3 on Windows

Now we'll demonstrate how to install Python 3 on Windows. For Windows you'll need to visit the official Python website at python.org and then head to the Download page by clicking on the link to the left. For Windows you should choose one of the MSI Installers depending on whether you're running on a 32- or 64-bit platform. Download and run the installer. In the installer decide whether you want to install Python only for yourself or for all users, and choose a location for the Python distribution. The defaults will be in Python33 in the root of the C drive. We don't recommend installing Python into program files because the virtualized file store used to isolate applications from each other in Windows Vista and above can interfere with easily installing third- party Python packages. On the Customize Python page of the wizard, we recommend keeping the defaults, which use less than 40 MB of space. In addition to installing the Python runtime standard library, the installer will register various file types such as PY files with the Python interpreter. Once Python has been installed, you'll need to add Python to your system path environment variable. To do this, from the Control Panel choose System and Security and then System. Using the test pane on the left choose advanced system settings to open the advanced tab of the System Properties dialog. Click Environment Variables to open the child dialog. If you have administrative privileges, you should be able to add the path's Python33 and Python33\Scripts to the semicolon separated list of entries associated with the path system variable. If not, you should be able to create or append to a path variable specific to your user containing the same value. Click OK once, twice, and three times to exit the dialogs. Now open a new console window, either PowerShell or CMD will work fine, and verify that you can run Python from the command line. Welcome to Python! The triple arrow prompt shows you that Python is waiting for your input. At this point you might want to skip forward while we show you how to install Python on Linux and Mac.

Installing Python 3 on Linux

Now we'll demonstrate how to install Python 3 on Ubuntu Linux. To install Python on Linux, you'll want to use your system's package manager. For this course, we'll show how to install Python on a recent version of Ubuntu, but the process is very similar on most other modern Linux distributions. On Unbuntu, first start the Ubuntu Software Center. This can usually be run by clicking its icon in the launcher. Alternatively, you can run it from the dashboard by searching on Ubuntu Software Center and clicking the selection. Once you're in the Software Center, enter the search term Python 3.3 in the search bar in the upper right hand corner and press Return. One of the results you get will say Python (v3.3) with Python interpreter at 3.3 in smaller type beneath it. Select this entry, and click the Install button that appears. You may need to enter your password to install the software at this point. You should now see a progress indicator appear, which will disappear when the installation is complete. Open a terminal using Control+Alt+T, and verify that you can run Python 3.3 from the command line. Welcome to Python! The triple arrow prompt shows that Python is waiting for your input.

Installing Python 3 on Mac OS X

Now we'll demonstrate how to install Python 3 on Mac OS X. For Mac OS X, you need to visit the official Python website that's python.org. Head to the Download page by clicking the link on the left. On the Download page, find the Mac OS X installer matching your version of Mac OS X, and click the link to download it. A DMG disk image file downloads, which you open from your download stack or from the finder. In the finder window that opens, you'll see the file Python.mpkg, a multi-package installer file. Use the secondary click action to open the context menu for that file. From that menu select Open. On some version of Mac OS X you'll now be told that the file is from an unidentified developer. Press the Open button on this dialog to continue with the installation. You are now in the Python Installer program. Follow the directions clicking through the wizard. There's no need to customize the install, and you should keep the standard settings. When it's available, click the Install button to install Python. You may be asked for your password to authorize the installation. Once the installation completes, click Close to close the installer. Now that Python 3 is installed, open a Terminal window and verify that you can run Python 3 from the command line. Welcome to Python! The triple arrow prompt shows that Python is waiting for your input.

The Read-Eval-Print-Loop or REPL

Now that Python is installed and running, we can immediately start using it. This is a good way to get to know the language, as well as a useful tool for experimentation and quick testing during normal development. This Python command line environment is a Read-Eval-Print-Loop. Python will read whatever input we type in, evaluate it, print the result, and then loop back to the beginning. You'll often hear it referred to as simply the REPL. When started, the REPL will print some information about the version of Python you're running, and then it will give you a triple arrow prompt. This prompt tells you that Python is waiting for you to type something. Within an interactive Python session you can enter fragments of Python programs and see instant results. Let's start with some simple arithmetic. 2 + 2 is 4. As you can see, Python reads that input, evaluates it, prints the result, and loops around to do the same again. 6 * 7 is 42. We can assign to variables in the REPL, x = 5, and print their content simply by typing their name. We can also refer to variables and expressions such as 3 * x. Within the REPL you can use the special underscore variable to refer to the most recently printed value, this being one of very few obscure shortcuts in Python, or you can use the special underscore variable in an expression. Remember though that this useful trick works only at the REPL. The underscore doesn't have any special behavior in Python's scripts or programs. Notice that not all statements have a return value. When we assigned 5 to X there was no return value, only the side effect of bringing the variable X into being. Other statements have more visible side effects. Try print ('Hello, Python') at the prompt followed by Return. You'll see that Python immediately evaluates and executes this command printing the string Hello, Python and returning you to another prompt. It's important to understand that the response here is not the result of the expression evaluated and displayed by the REPL, but is a side effect of the print function. As an aside, print is one of the biggest differences between Python 2 and Python 3. In Python 3 the parentheses are required whereas in Python 2 they were not. This is because in Python 3 print is a function call. More on functions later. At this point, we should show you how to exit the REPL. We do this by sending the end of file control character to Python, although unfortunately the means of sending this character varies across platforms. If you're on Windows, press Control+Z to exit. If you're on Mac or Linux, press Control+D to exit. If you regularly switch between platforms and you accidentally press Control+Z on a Unix-like system, you'll inadvertently suspend the Python interpreter and return to your operating system's shell. To reactivate Python making it a foreground process again, simply run the fg command, and press Enter a couple of times to get the triple arrow Python prompt back.

Significant Whitespace in Python

Start your Python 3 interpreter using the Python or Python 3 command for Windows or Unix-like systems respectively. The control flow structures of Python such as for loops, while loops, and if statements are all introduced by statements which are terminated by a colon indicating that the body of the construct is to follow. For example, for loops require a body. So, if you enter for i in range(5), Python will change the prompt to three dots to request you provide the body. One distinctive and sometimes controversial aspect of Python is that leading whitespace is syntactically significant. What this means is that Python uses indentation levels rather than the braces used by other languages to demarcate code blocks. By convention, contemporary Python code is indented by four spaces for each level, so we provide those four spaces and a statement to form the body of our loop, x = i * 10. Our loop body will contain a second statement. So, after pressing Return, at the next three dot prompt we enter another four spaces followed by a call to the built-in print function. To terminate our block, we must enter a blank line into the REPL. With the block complete, Python executes the pending code printing out the multiples of 10 less than 50. Looking at a screen full of Python code, we can see how the indentation clearly matches, and in fact must match the structure of the program. Even if we replace the code by gray lines, the structure of the program is clear. Each statement terminates by a colon, starts a new line, and introduces an additional level of indentation, which continues until a dedent restores the indentation to a previous level. Each level of indent is typically four spaces, although we'll cover the rules in more detail in a moment. Python's approach to significant whitespace has three great advantages. First, it forces developers to use a single level of indentation in a code block. This is generally considered good practice in any language because it makes code much more readable. Second, code with a significant whitespace doesn't need to be cluttered with unnecessary braces, and you never need to have a code standard debate about where the braces should go. All code blocks in Python code are easily identifiable, and everyone writes them the same way. Third, significant whitespace requires that a consistent interpretation must be given to the structure of the code by the author, the Python runtime system, and future maintainers who need to read the code, so you can never have code that contains a block from Python's point of view, but which doesn't look like it from a cursory human perspective. The rules for Python indentation can seem complex, but are straightforward in practice. The whitespace you use can either be spaces or tabs. The general consensus is that spaces are preferable to tabs, and four spaces has become standard in the Python community. One essential rule is never to mix spaces and tabs. The Python interpreter will complain, and your colleagues will hunt you down. You are allowed to use different amounts of indentation at different times if you wish. The essential rule is that consecutive lines of code at the same indentation level are considered to be part of the same code block. There are some exceptions to these rules, but they almost always have to do with improving code readability in other ways, for example, by breaking up necessarily long statements over multiple lines. This vigorous approach to code formatting is programming as Guido indented it. The philosophy of placing a high value on code quality such as readability gets to the very heart of Python culture, something we'll take a short look at now.

Python Culture and the Zen of Python

Many programming languages are at the center of a cultural movement. They have their own communities, values, practices, and philosophy, and Python is no exception. The development of the Python language itself is managed through a series of documents called Python Enhancement Proposals or PEPs. One of the PEPs called PEP 8 explains how you should format your code, and we follow its guidelines throughout this course. It is PEP 8 which recommends we use four spaces for indentation in new Python code. Another of these PEPs called PEP 20 is called The Zen of Python. It refers to 20 aphorisms describing the guiding principles of Python, only 19 of which have been written down. Conveniently, The Zen of Python is never further away than the nearest Python interpreter as it can always be accessed from the REPL by typing import this. Throughout this course, we'll be highlighting particular negative wisdom from The Zen of Python in moments of Zen to understand how they apply to what we have learned. As we've just introduced Python significant indentation, this is a good time for our first moment. Readability counts. Clarity matters. So, readability makes for valuable code. In time you'll come to appreciate Python's significant whitespace for the elegance it brings to your code and these with which you can read others.

Importing From the Python Standard Library

As mentioned earlier, Python comes with an extensive Standard Library, an aspect of Python often referred to as Batteries Included. The Standard Library is structured as modules, a topic we'll discuss in depth later in the course. What's important at this stage is to know that you gain access to Standard Library modules using the import keyword. The basic form of importing a module is simply the import keyword followed by a space and the name of the module. For example, let's see how we can use the Standard Library's math module to compute square roots. At the triple arrow prompt we type import math. Since import is the statement which doesn't return a value, Python doesn't print anything if the import succeeds and we immediately return to the prompt. We can access the contents of the imported module by using the name of the module followed by a dot followed by the name of the attribute in the module that you need. Like many object-oriented languages, the dot operator is used to drill down into object structures. Being expert Pythonistas, we have inside knowledge that the math module contains a function called square root. Let's try to use it. But how can we find out what other functions are available in the math module? The REPL has a special function, help, which can retrieve any embedded documentation from objects for which it has been provided such as Standard Library modules. To get help, type simply help. We'll leave you to explore the first form for interactive help in your own time. We'll go for the second option and pass the math module as the object for which we want help. You can use the spacebar to page through the help, and if you're on Mac or Linux use the arrow keys to scroll up and down. Browsing through the functions we can see there's a math function for computing factorials. Press Q to exit the help browser and return us to the Python REPL. Practice using help to request specific help on the factorial function. Press Q to return to the REPL. Let's use the factorial function, which accepts an integer and returns an integer. Notice how we need to qualify the function name with the module namespace. This is generally good practice as it makes it abundantly clear where the function is coming from. That said, it can result in code that is excessively verbose. Let's use factorials to compute how many ways there are to draw three fruits from a set of five fruits using some math we learned in school. (Typing) This simple expression is quite verbose with all those references to the math module. The Python import statement has an alternative form that allows us to bring a specific function from a module into the current namespace. This is a good improvement, but it's still a little long winded for such a simple expression. A third form of the import statement allows us to rename the imported function. This can be useful for reasons of readability or to avoid a namespace clash. Useful as it is, we recommend that this feature be used infrequently and judiciously. Remember that when we use factorial alone it returned an integer, but our more complex expression for combinations is returning a floating-point number. This is because we've used Python's floating-point division operator, the single forward slash. We can improve our expression since we know it only ever returns integral results by using Python's integer division operator, which is a double forward slash. What's notable is that many other programming languages would fail on the above expression for even moderate values of N. In most programming languages, regular garden variety signed integers can only store values less than 2 to the power of 31. However, factorials grow so fast that the largest factorial you can fit into a 32-bit signed integer is 12 factorial since 13 factorial is too large. In most widely used programming languages, you would need more complex code or more sophisticated mathematics merely to compute how many ways there are to draw 3 fruits from a set of 13 fruits. Python encounters no such problems and can compute with arbitrarily large integers limited only by the memory in your computer. Let's try the larger problem of computing how many different pairs of fruit we can pick from 100 different fruits assuming we can lay our hands on so many fruit. Just to emphasize how large the size of the first term of that expression is, calculate 100 factorial on its own. It's a number vastly larger even than the number of atoms in the known universe with an awful lot of digits. If like me you're curious to know exactly how many digits, we can convert our integer to a text string and count the number of characters in it like this. Let's move on and look at integers, strings, and other built-in types in more detail.

Scalar Types: int, float, None and bool

Python comes with a number of built-in data types. These include primitive scalar types like integers, as well as collection types like dictionaries. These built-in types are powerful enough to be used alone for many programming needs, and they can be used as building blocks for creating more complex data types. In this section we'll cover the basic scalar built-in types int, float, None, and bool. We'll provide basic information about these now showing their literal forms and how to create them. We've already seen quite a lot of Python integers in action. Python integers are signed and have for all practical purposes unlimited precision. Integer literals in Python are specified in decimal, but may also be specified in binary with a 0b prefix, up top with a 0o prefix, or hexadecimal with a 0x prefix. We can also construct integers by a call to the int constructor, which can convert from other numeric types such as floats to integers. Note that rounding is always towards 0. We can also convert strings to integers. To convert from base 3, use int and then 10000 as a string comma 3. Floating point numbers are supported in Python by the float type. Python floats are implemented as IEEE-754 double precision floating point numbers with 53 bits of binary precision. This is equivalent to between 15 and 16 significant digits in decimal. Any literal number containing a decimal point or a letter E is interpreted by Python as a float. Scientific notation can be used. So, for large numbers such as the approximate speed of light in meters per second 3 times 10 to the 8, we can write 3e8. And for small numbers like Planck's constant 1.616 times 10 to the -35, we can enter 1.616e-35. Notice how Python automatically switches the display representation to the most readable form. As for integers, we can convert to floats from other numeric or string types using the float constructor from an int and from a string. This is also how we create the special floating- point values nan or not a number and also positive and negative infinity. The result of any calculation involving int and float is promoted to a float. Python has a special null value called None with a capital N. None is frequently used to represent the absence of a value. The Python REPL never prints None results, so typing None into the REPL has no effect. None can be bound to a variable name just like any other object, and we can test whether an object is None by using Python's is operator. We can see here that the response is True, which brings us conveniently onto the bool type. The bool type represents logical states and plays an important role in several of Python's control flow structures as we'll see shortly. As you would expect, there are two bool values, True and False, both with initial capitals, and also a bool constructor, which can be used to convert from other types to bool. Let's look at how it works. For integers, 0 is considered falsey, and all other values truthy. (Typing) We see the same behavior with floats where only 0 is considered falsey. (Typing) When converting from collections such as strings or lists, only empty collections are treated as falsey. Converting from lists, which we'll look at shortly, (Typing) and strings (Typing) in particular, you cannot use the bool constructor to covert from the string representations of True and False because the string False is not empty. These conversions to bool are important because they are widely used in Python if statements and while loops, which accept bool values into the condition.

Relational Operators

Bool values are commonly produced by Python's relational operators, which can be used for comparing objects. The relational operators are sometimes called the comparison operators. These include value equality and inequality, less-than, greater-than, less-than or equal to, and greater- than or equal to. Two of the most widely used relational operators are Python's equality and inequality tests, which actually test for equivalence or inequivalence of values. That is two objects are equivalent if one could be used in place of the other. We'll learn more about the notion of object equivalence later in the course. For now, we'll simply compare integers. Let's start by assigning or binding a value to a variable g. We test for equality with a double equals operator or for inequality using the not equals operator. We can also compare the order of quantity using the so- called rich comparison operators less-than, greater-than, less-than or equal to, and greater-than or equal to.

Conditional Statements

Now we've examined some basic built-in types. We'll look at two important control flow structures, which depend on conversions to the bool type, while loops, but first if statements. Conditional statements allow us to branch execution based on the value of an expression. The form of the statement is the if keyword followed by an expression terminated by a colon to introduce a new block. The expression is converted to bool as if by the bool constructor. Let's try this at the REPL. Remembering to indent four spaces within the block, we add some code to be executed if the condition is True followed by a blank line to terminate the block at which point the block will execute because self- evidently the condition is true. Conversely, if the condition is False, the code in the block does not execute. Because the expression used with the if statement will be converted to bool just as if the bool constructor had been used, this form (Typing) is exactly equivalent to this form. (Typing) Thanks to this useful shorthand, explicit conversion to bool using the bool constructor is rarely used in Python. The if statement supports an optional else clause, which goes in a block introduced by the else keyword followed by a colon, which is indented to the same level as the if keyword. To start the else block in this case, we just omit the indentation after the three dots. (Typing) For multiple conditions, you might be tempted to do something like this, nesting if statements. Whenever you find yourself with an else block containing a nested if statement like this, you should consider instead using Python's elif keyword, which is a combined else/if. As The Zen of Python reminds us, flat is better than nested. This version is altogether easier to read. We'll quickly demonstrate it at the REPL. (Typing)

While Loops

Python has two types of loops, for loops and while loops. We've already briefly encountered for loops back when we introduced significant whitespace, and we'll return to them soon, but right now we'll cover while loops. While loops in Python are introduced by the while keyword, which is followed by a Boolean expression. As with a condition for if statements, the expression is implicitly converted to a Boolean value as if it had been passed to the bool constructor. The while statement is terminated by a colon because it introduces a new block. Let's write a while loop at the REPL, which counts down from five to one. We'll initialize a counter variable called c to 5 and keep looping until with reach 0. Another new language feature here is the use of the augmented assignment operator to subtract one from the value of the counter on each iteration. Similar augmented assignment operators exist for the other basic math operators such as plus and multiply. Because the condition or predicate will be implicitly converted to bool just as if a call to the bool constructor were present, we could replace the above code with the following version. This works because the conversion of the integer value of c to bool results in true until we get to 0, which converts to false. That said, to use the short form of this case might be described as unphythonic because referring back to The Zen of Python explicit is better than implicit, and we place a higher value on the readability of the first form over the concision of the second form. While loops are often used in Python where an infinite loop is required. We achieve this simply by passing True as the predicate expression to the while construct. Now, you're probably wondering how we get out of this loop and regain control of our REPL. We press Control+C, which Python intercepts to raise a special exception, which terminates the loop. We'll be talking much more about what exceptions are and how to use them later in the course. Many programming languages support a loop construct, which places the predicate test at the end of the loop rather than at the beginning. For example, C, C++, C#, and Java support the do while construct. Other languages have repeat until loops instead or as well. This is not the case in Python where the idiom is to use while True together with an early exit facilitated by the break statement. The break statement jumps out of the loop, and only the innermost loop if several loops have been nested, continuing execution immediately after the loop body. Let's look at an example of break introducing a few other Python features along the way. We start with while True for an infinite loop. On the first statement of the while block we use the built- in input function to request a string from the user. We assign that string to a variable called response. We now use an if statement to test whether the value provided is divisible by 7. We convert the response string to an integer using the int constructor, and then use the modulus operator with a percent symbol to divide by 7 and give us the remainder. If the remainder is equal to 0, the response was divisible by 7, then we enter the body of the if block. Within the if block, now two levels of indentation deep, we start with eight spaces and use the break keyword. Break terminates the innermost loop, in this case the while loop, and causes execution to jump to the first statement after the loop, or in our case the end of the program. And for a blank line, the three dots prompt close both if block and the while block. Our loop will start executing, and we'll pause at the calls of the input function waiting for us to enter a number. Let's try a few, 12, 67, 34, and 28. As soon as we enter a number divisible by 7, the predicate becomes true. We enter the if block, and then literally break out of the loop to the end of the program returning us to the REPL prompt.

Summary

We've covered a lot of ground in this Getting Started module. Let's summarize what we've seen. We started by obtaining and installing Python 3 for Windows, Ubuntu Linux, and Mac OS X. We then looked at the Read-Eval-Print-Loop or REPL, and how it allows us to interactively explore Python code. We learned some simple arithmetic operators with plus, minus, multiply, divide, modulus, and the integer division operator with double slash. We discovered we could give objects names with the assignment operator using the equals symbol. We learned how to print objects, and we showed you how to exit the REPL, which is different on Windows with Control+Z or Linux and Mac with Control+D. We showed how Python uses significant indentation of code to demarcate code blocks. Each indent level is usually four spaces. And we told you about Python Enhancement Proposals, the documents which govern the evolution of the Python language. In particular, we briefly looked at PEP 8, which is the Python Style Guide, which we follow in this course, and PEP 20, The Zen of Python, which gives useful advice on writing Pythonic code. We looked at importing Python's Standard Library modules using the import statement. Import has three forms: Import module, from module import function, and from module import function as alias. We used all three of these forms during this course module. We showed how to find and browse help(), particularly useful for discovering the Standard Library. We looked at the four built-in scalar types int, float, None, and bool and showed how to convert between these types and use their literal forms. We looked at the six relational operators equality, inequality, less-than, greater-than, less-than or equal to, and greater-than or equal to. These are used for equivalence testing and ordering. We demonstrated structuring conditional code with if, elif, else structures. We shared iterating with while loops and how to interrupt execution of infinite loops using Control+C, which generates a keyboard interrupt exception. We gave an example of how to break out of a loop using the break statement, which breaks out of the innermost loop onto the first statement immediately following the loop, and along the way we looked at the augmented assignment operators for modifying objects in place such as counter variables. We also looked at requesting text from the user at the console with the built-in input() function. Next time here on Python Fundamentals we'll continue our exploration of Python's built-in types and control flow structures by looking at strings, lists, dictionaries, and for-loops. We'll even be using Python to fetch some data from the web for processing. Thanks for watching, and we'll see you in the next module.

Strings and Collections

Introduction

Hi. My name is Austin Bingham. Welcome to the second module of the Python Fundamentals course, which is about strings, collections, and iteration with for-loops. Python includes a rich selection of collection types, which are often completely sufficient for even quite intricate programs without resorting to defining our own data structures. We'll give enough of an overview of some fundamental collection types now, enough to allow us to write some interesting code. We'll also be revisiting each of these collection types together with a few additional ones later in the course. Let's start with these types str, bytes, list, and dict. Along the way we'll also cover Python's for-loops.

Strings

Strings in Python have the data type str spelled S-T-R, and we've been using them extensively already. Strings are sequences of Unicode codepoints, and for the most part you can think of codepoints as being like characters, although they aren't strictly equivalent. The sequence of characters in a Python string is immutable meaning that once you've constructed a string you can't modify its contents. Literal strings in Python are delimited by quotes. You can use single quotes or double quotes. You must, however, be consistent. For example, you can't do this. Supporting both quoting styles allows you to easily incorporate the other quote characters into the literal string without resorting to ugly escape character gymnastics. Notice that the REPL exploits the same quoting flexibility when echoing the strings back to us.

Moment of Zen: Practicality Beats Purity

At first sight, support for both quoting styles seems to violate an important principle of Pythonic style from The Zen of Python. There should be one and preferably only one obvious way to do it. In this case, however, another aphorism from the same source, practicality beats purity, takes precedence. The utility of supporting two quoting styles is valued more highly than the alternative, a single quoting style combined with more frequent use of ugly escape sequences, which we'll encounter shortly.

Strings (Continued)

Adjacent literal strings are concatenated by the Python compiler into a single string, which although at first it seems rather pointless, can be useful for nicely formatting code as we'll see later. If you want a literal string containing new lines, you have two options, use multiline strings or use escape sequences. First, multiline strings. Multiline strings are delimited by three quote characters rather than one. Here's an example of using three double quotes. Notice how when the string is echoed back to us the new lines are represented by the slash N escapes sequence. We can also use three single quotes. As an alternative to using multiline quoting, we can just embed the control characters ourselves, or to get a better sense of what we're representing, we can use print to see the string. If you're working on Windows, you might be thinking that new lines should be represented by the carriage return at new line couplet \r\n. There's no need to do that with Python since Python 3 has a feature called universal newlines support, which translates from the simple \n to the native newline sequence for your platform on input and output. You can read more about universal newlines support in PEP278. We can use the escapes sequences for other purposes too such as incorporating tabs with slash T or allowing us to use quote characters within strings by using a slash followed by the quote sign that you want. See how Python is smarter than we are using the most convenient quote delimiters, although Python will also resort to escapes sequences when we use both types of quotes in a string. Because the backslash has special meaning, to place a backslash in a string we escape the backslash with itself. To reassure ourselves that there really is only one backslash in that string, we can print it. You can read more about escape sequences in the Python documentation at python.org. Sometimes, particularly when dealing with strings such as Windows file system paths or regular expression patterns, which use backslashes extensively, the requirement to double up on backslashes can be ugly and error prone. Python comes to the rescue with its raw strings. Raw strings don't support any escapes sequences and are very much what you see is what you get. To create a raw string, prefix the opening quote with a lowercase R. We can use the string constructor to create string representations of other types such as integers or floats. Strings in Python are what are called sequence types, which means they support certain common operations for querying sequences. For example, we can access individual characters using square brackets with an integer zero-based index. Note that in contrast to many other programming languages there is no separate character type distinct from the string type. The indexing operation we just used returns a full-blown string that contains a single character element, something we can test using Python's built-in type function. There will be more on types and classes later in the course. String objects also support a wide variety of operations implemented as methods. We can list those methods by using help on the string type. Ignore all the hieroglyphics with underscores for now, and page down until you see the documentation for the capitalize method. Press Q to quit the help browser, and we'll try to use that method. First, let's make a string that deserves capitalization, the proper noun of a capital city no less. To call methods on objects in Python, we use the dot after the object name and before the method name. Methods are functions, so we must use the parentheses to indicate that the method should be called. Remember that strings are immutable, so the capitalize method didn't modify C in place. It returned a new string. We can verify this by displaying C, which remains unchanged. You might like to spend a little time familiarizing yourself with the various useful methods provided by the string Finally, because strings are fully Unicode capable, you can use them with international characters easily, even in literals because the default source code encoding for Python 3 is UTF-8. For example, if you have access to Norwegian characters, you can simply enter this. Alternatively, you can use the hexadecimal Unicode codepoints as an escape sequence prefixed by slash U, which I'm sure you'll agree is somewhat more unwieldy. There are no such Unicode capabilities in the otherwise similar bytes type, which we'll look at next.

Bytes

Bytes are very similar to strings except that rather than being sequences of Unicode codepoints, they are sequences of well, bytes. As such, they are used for raw binary data and fixed with single byte character encodings such as ASCII. As with strings, they have a simple literal form using quotes, the first of which is prefixed by a lowercase B. There is also a bytes constructor, but it's an advanced feature, and we won't cover it in this fundamentals course. At this point, it's sufficient for us to recognize bytes literals and understand that they support most of the same operations as strings such as indexing and splitting. You'll see that the split method returns a list of bytes objects. To convert between bytes and strings, we must know the encoding of the byte sequence used to represent the string's Unicode codepoints as bytes. Python supports a wide variety of encodings, a full list of which can be found at python.org. Let's start with an interesting Unicode string, which contains all the characters of the 29 letter Norwegian alphabet, a pangram. We'll now encode that using UTF-8 into a bytes object. See how the Norwegian characters have each been rendered as pairs of bytes. We can reverse the process using the decode method of the bytes object. Again, we must supply the correct encoding. We can check that the result is equal to what we started with and display it for good measure. This may seem like an unnecessary detail so early in the course, especially if you operate in an anglophone environment, but it's crucial to understand since files and network resources such as HTTP responses are transmitted as byte streams whereas we prefer to work with the convenience of Unicode strings.

Lists

Python lists such as those returned by the string's split method are sequences of objects. Unlike strings, lists are mutable in so far as the elements within them can be replaced or removed, and new elements can be inserted or appended. Lists are the workhorse of Python data structures. Literal lists are delimited by square brackets, and the items within the list separated by commas. Here is a list of three numbers and a list of three strings. We can retrieve elements by using square brackets with a zero-based index, and we can replace elements by assigning to a specific element. See how lists can be heterogeneous with respect to the types of the objects. We now have a list containing a string, an integer, and another string. It's often useful to create an empty list, which we can do using empty square brackets. We can modify the list in other ways. Let's add some floats to the end of the list using the append method. There are many other useful methods for manipulating lists, which we'll cover in a later module. There is also a list constructor, which can be used to create lists from other collections such as strings. Finally, although the significant whitespace rules in Python can at first seem very rigid, there is a lot of flexibility. For example, if at the end of the line brackets, braces, or parentheses are unclosed, you can continue on the next line. This can be very useful for long literal collections or simply to improve readability. See also how we're allowed to use an additional comma after the last element, an important maintainability feature.

Dictionaries

Dictionaries are completely fundamental to the way the Python language works and are very widely used. A dictionary maps keys to values and in some languages is known as an associate of array. Let's look at how to create and use them in Python. Literal dictionaries are created using curly braces containing key value pairs. Each pair is separated by a comma, and each key is separated from the corresponding value by a colon. Here we use a dictionary to create a simple telephone directory. We can retrieve items by key using the square brackets operator and update the values associated with the key by assigning through the square brackets. If we assign to a key that has not yet been added, a new entry is created. Be aware that the entries in the dictionary can't be relied upon to be stored in any particular order. Similarly to lists, empty dictionaries can be created using empty curly braces. We'll revisit dictionaries in much more detail in Module 5.

For-Loops

Now that we have the tools to make some interesting data structures, we'll look at Python's second type of loop construct, the for-loop. For-loops in Python correspond to what are called for-each loops in many other programming languages. They request items one-by-one from a collection or more strictly from an iterable series, but more of that later, and assign them in turn to a variable we specify. Let's create a collection and use a for-loop to iterate over it. If you iterate over dictionaries, you get the keys, which you can then use within the for-loop body to retrieve values. Here we define a dictionary mapping string color names to hexadecimal integer color codes. Note that we use the ability of the built-in print function to accept multiple arguments. We pass the key and the value for each color separately. See also how the color codes returned to us are in decimal. Now, before we put some of what we've learned together into a useful program, practice exiting the Python REPL with Control+Z on Windows or Control+D on Mac or Linux.

Putting it All Together

In this last section before we summarize, we're going to write a longer snippet at the REPL and briefly introduce the with-statement. We're going to fetch some text data for some classic literature from the web using a Python Standard Library function called the urlopen. To get access to urlopen, we need to import the function from the request module within the standard library urllib package. Next we're going to call urlopen with a URL to our story. We'll be using a Python construct called a with block to manage the resource returned by the URL since under the hood fetching the resource from the web requires operating system sockets and such like. We'll be talking more about with-statements in a later module, but for now it's enough to know that using a with-statement with objects which use external resources such as this is very good practice to avoid resource leaks. The with-statement calls the urlopen function and binds the response to a variable named story. Notice that the with-statement is terminated by a colon introducing a new block, so we indent four spaces and create an empty list, which ultimately will hold all of the words from the text. Next we open a for-loop, which will work through the story. Recall that for-loops request items one-by- one from the term on the right of the in keyword, in this case story, and assign them in turn to the name on the left, in this case line. It so happens that the type of HTTP response represented by story yields successive lines of text when iterated over in this way. So, the for-loop retrieves one line of text at a time from Dickens' classic. Note also that the for-statement is terminated by a colon because it introduces the body of the for-loop, which is a new block and hence a further level of indentation. For each line of text we use the split method to divide it into words on whitespace boundaries resulting in a list of words we call line words. Now we use a second for-loop nested inside the first to iterate over this list of words appending each in turn to the accumulating story_words list. Finally, we enter a blank line at the three dots prompt to close all open blocks. In this case, the inner for-loop, the outer for-loop, and the with-block will all be terminated. The block will be executed, and after a short delay Python now returns us to the regular triple arrow prompt. At this point, if Python gives you an error such as a syntax error or indentation error, you should go back, review what you have entered, and carefully reenter the code until Python accepts the whole block without complaint. If you get an HTTP error, then you were unable to fetch the resource over the internet, and you should try again later, although it's worth checking that you have typed the URL correctly. We can now look at those words simply by asking Python to evaluate the value of story_words. Here we can see the list of words. Notice that each of the single quoted words is prefixed by a lowercase B meaning that we have a list of bytes objects where we would have preferred a list of strings. This is because the HTTP request transferred raw bytes to us over the network. To get a list of strings, we should decode the byte stream in each line into UTF-8 Unicode strings. We can do this by inserting a call to the decode method of the bytes object and then operating on the resulting Unicode string. The Python REPL supports a simple command line history, and by careful use of the up and down arrows we can reenter our snippet. When we get to the line which needs to be changed, we can edit it using the left and right arrow keys to insert the requisite call to decode. Then when we rerun the block and take a fresh look at story_words we should see we have a list of strings. We've just about reached the limit of what's possible to comfortably edit at the Python REPL, so in the next course module we'll look at how to move this code into a Python module where it can be more easily worked within a text editor.

Summary

Let's sum up. First, we looked at strings, in particular the various forms of quoting for single- and multi- line strings. We saw how adjacent string literals are implicitly concatenated. Python has support for universal newlines, so no matter what platform you're using, it's sufficient to use a single slash N character safe in the knowledge that it will be appropriately translated to and from the native newline during I/O. Escape sequences provide an alternative means of incorporating newlines and other control characters into literal strings. The backslashes used for escaping can be a hindrance for Windows file system paths or regular expressions, so raw strings with an R prefix can be used to suppress the escaping mechanism. Other types such as integers can be converted to strings using the str() constructor. Individual characters returned as one character strings can be retrieved using square brackets with integer zero-based indices. Strings support a rich variety of operations such as splitting through their methods. In Python 3 literal strings can contain Unicode characters directly in the source. The bytes type has many of the capabilities of strings, but is a sequence of bytes rather than a sequence of Unicode codepoints. Bytes literals are prefixed with a lowercase B. To covert between string and bytes instances, we use the encode() method of str and the decode() method of bytes in both cases passing the encoding, which we must know in advance. Lists are mutable, heterogeneous sequences of objects. List literals are delimited by square brackets, and the items are separated by commas. As with strings, individual elements can be retrieved by indexing into a list with square brackets. In contrast to strings, individual list elements can be replaced by assigning to the indexed item. Lists can be grown by appending to them and can be constructed from other sequences using the list() constructor. Dictionaries associate keys with values. Literal dictionaries are delimited by curly braces. The key value pairs are separated from each other by commas, and each key is associated with its corresponding value with a colon. For-loops take items one-by-one from an iterable object such as a list and bind the name to the current item. For-loops correspond to what are called for-each loops in other languages. Thanks for watching, and we'll see you in the next module.

Modularity

Introduction

Hello. My name is Robert Smallshire. Welcome to the third module of the Python Fundamentals course, which is about the structure and organization, or modularity, of Python programs. Modularity is an important property for anything but trivial software systems as it gives us the power to make self-contained, reusable pieces, which can be combined in new ways to solve different problems. As with most programming languages, the most fine-grained modularization facility is the definition of reusable functions. Collections of related functions are typically grouped into source code files called modules. Modules can be used from other modules, so long as we take care not to introduce a circular dependency. As we have seen already, we can import modules into the REPL, and we'll show you how modules can be executed directly as programs or scripts. Along the way, we'll investigate the Python execution model to ensure you have a good understanding of exactly when code is evaluated and executed. We'll round off by showing you how to use command line arguments to get basic configuration data into your program and make your program executable. To illustrate this module, we'll be taking the code snippet for retrieving words from a web-hosted text document we developed at the end of the previous session and organizing it into a fully-fledged Python module.

Creating, Running, and Importing a Module

Let's start with the snippet we worked with last time. Open a text editor, preferably one with syntax highlighting support for Python, and configure it to insert four spaces per indent level when you press the tab key. You should also check that your editor saves the file using the UTF-8 encoding as that's what the Python 3 runtime expects by default. Let's get the snippet we wrote at the REPL at the end of the previous module into a text file called words.py. All Python source files use the .py extension. Now we're using a text file for our code, we can pay a little more attention to readability. Let's put a blank line after the import statement. Save the file in a directory called pyfund in your home directory. Switch to a console with your operating system shell prompt and change to the new pyfund directory. We can execute our module simply by calling python3 and passing the module's filename. When you press return, after a short delay, you'll be returned to the system prompt. Not very impressive, but if you got no response, the program is running as expected. If, on the other hand, you got an error, an HTTP error indicates there's a network problem while other types of error probably mean you mistyped the code. Let's add another for loop to the end of the program to print out one word per line. This is much better. Now we have the beginnings of a useful program. Our module can also be imported into the REPL. Let's try that and see what happens. Start the REPL and import your module. When importing, we omit the file extension. The code in your module is executed immediately when imported, maybe not what you'd expected and not very useful. To give us more control over when our code is executed and to allow it to be reused, we'll need to put our code in a function.

Defining Functions and Returning Values

Let's quickly define a few functions at the REPL to get the idea. Functions are defined using the def keyword followed by the function name, an argument list in parentheses, and a colon to start a new block. We use the return keyword to return a value form the function. As we've seen previously, we call functions by providing the actual arguments in parentheses, if there are any, after the function name. Functions aren't required to explicitly return a value though. Perhaps they produce side effects. You can return early from a function by using the return keyword with no parameter. A return keyword without a parameter, or the implicit return at the end of a function, actually causes the function to return None, although remember that the REPL doesn't display None results, so we don't see them. By capturing the returned object into a named variable, we can test for None.

Distinguishing Between Module Import and Module Execution

Let's organize our words module using functions. We'll move all the code, except the import statement, into a function called fetch_words. You do that simply by adding the def statement and indenting the code below it by one extra level. Save the module and reload the module using a fresh Python REPL. The module imports, but the words are not fetched until we call the fetch_words function. Alternatively, we can import our specific function. So far, so good. But what happens when we try to run our module directly from the operating system shell? Exit the REPL with Control +D on Mac or Linux or Control +Z on Windows, and run python3 passing the module filename words.py. No words are printed. This is because all executing the module does now is define a function and then immediately exit. To make a module from which we can usefully import functions into the REPL, and which can be run as a script, we need to learn a new Python idiom. The Python runtime system defines some special variables and attributes, the names of which are delimited by double underscores. One such variable is called __name__ and gives us the means for our module to detect whether it has been run as a script or imported into another module or the REPL. To see how, add print__name__ at the end of your module, outside the fetch_words function. First of all, let's import the modified words module back into the REPL with import words. We can see that when imported, double underscore name does indeed evaluate to the module's name. As a brief aside, if we import the module again, the print statement will not be executed. Module code is only executed once on first import. Now, let's try running the module as a script with python3 words.py. Now the special name variable is equal to the string __main__, which is also delimited by double underscores. Our module can use this behavior to detect how it is being used. We replaced the print statement with an if statement, which tests the value of double underscore name (__name__), and if it is equal to double underscore main (__main__), executes our function. Now we can safely import our module without unduly executing our function. And we can usefully run our function as a script.

The Python Execution Model

It's important to understand the Python execution model and precisely when function definitions and other important events occur when a module is imported or executed. Here we show execution of our Python module in the PyCharm graphical debugging environment. We step through the top-level statements in the module. What's important to realize here is that the def used for the fetch_words function isn't really a declaration. It's actually a statement, which when used in sequence with the other top-level module scope code causes the code within the function to be bound to the name of the function. When modules are imported or run, all of the top-level statements are run, and this is the means by which functions within the module namespace are defined. We're sometimes asked about the differences between Python modules, Python scripts, and Python programs. Any py file constitutes a Python module. But as we've seen, modules can be written for convenient import, convenient execution, or using the if __name__ equals __main__ idiom, both. We strongly recommend making even simple scripts importable since it eases development and testing so much if you can access your code from the Python REPL. Likewise, even modules which are only ever meant to be imported in production settings benefit from having executable test code. For this reason, nearly all modules we create have this form of defining one or more importable functions with a postscript to facilitate execution. Whether you consider our module to be a Python script or a Python program is a matter of context and usage. It's certainly wrong to consider Python to be merely a scripting tool in the vein of Windows batch files or Unix shell scripts as many large and complex applications have been built exclusively with Python.

Main Functions and Command Line Arguments

Now, we'll look at setting up a main function with a command line argument. We'll start by refining our word fetching module a little further. First, we'll perform a small refactoring and separate the word retrieval and collection on the one hand from the word printing on the other. This is because when importing, we'd rather get the words as a list, but when running directly, we'd prefer the words to be printed. Next, we'll extract a function from our if __name__ equals __main__ block called main. By moving this code into a function, we can test it from the REPL, which isn't possible while it's in the module scope if block. We can now try these functions from the REPL. We'll use this opportunity to introduce a couple of new forms of the import statement. The first new form imports multiple objects from a module using a comma-separated list. The parentheses are optional, but they do allow you to break this list over multiple lines if it gets long. This form is perhaps the most widely used form of the import statement. The second new form imports everything from a module using an asterisk wildcard. This latter form is recommended only for casual use at the REPL. It can wreak havoc in programs since what is imported is now potentially beyond your control, opening yourself up to namespace clashes at some future time. Having done this, we can fetch words from the URL, print any list of words, or indeed run the main program. Notice that the print words function isn't fussy about the type of items in the list. It's perfectly happy to print a list of numbers. So, perhaps print_words isn't the best name. In fact, the function doesn't mention lists either. It will happily print any collection that the for loop is capable of iterating over, such as a string. Given this, we'll perform a minor refactoring and rename this function to print_items, changing the variable names within the function to suit. We'll talk more about the dynamic typing in Python, which allows this degree of flexibility, in the next module. One obvious improvement to our module would be to replace the hard-coded URL with a value we can pass in. Let's extract that value into an argument of the fetch_words function called URL. When running our module as a standalone program, we need to accept the URL as a command line argument. Access to command line arguments in Python is through an attribute of the sys module called argv, which is a list of strings. To use it, we must import sys at the top of our program and then get the second argument with an index of 1 from the list. This works as expected when we pass a URL from the command line. This all looks fine until we realize that we can't usefully test the main function any longer from the REPL because it refers to sys.argv The solution is to allow the argument list to be passed as a formal argument to the main function using sys.argv as the actual parameter in the if __name__ == __main__ block. Testing from the REPL again, we show that main is also usable from here. For more sophisticated command line processing, we recommend you look at the Python standard library argparse module or the inspired third-party docopt module.

Sparse Is Better Than Dense

You may have noticed that our top-level functions have two blank lines between them. This is conventional for modern Python code. Sparse is better than dense. Two between functions, that is the number of lines PEP 8 recommends. According to the PEP 8 style guide, it's customary to use two blank lines between module level functions. We find this convention has served us well making code easier to navigate.

Documenting Your Code Using Docstrings

Now we'll look at documenting your code using a feature called docstrings. We saw previously how it was possible to ask at the REPL for help on Python functions. Let's look at how to add this self-documenting capability to our own module. API documentation in Python uses a facility called docstrings. Docstrings are literal strings, which occur as the first statement within a named block, such as a function or module. Let's document the fetch_words function. We use triple quoted strings even for single-line docstrings because they can easily be expanded to add more detail later. One Python convention for docstrings is documented in PEP 257, although it's not widely adopted. Various tools, such as Sphinx, are available to both HTML documentation from Python docstrings, and each tool mandates its preferred docstrings format. Our preference is to use the form presented in Googles Python Style Guide since it is amenable to being machine passed while still remaining readable at the console to humans. Now we've added the docstring, we can access it through Help from the REPL. We'll go ahead and add similar docstrings for our other functions, print items, and main. Each docstring begins with a short description of the purpose of the function followed by, as necessary, a list of the arguments to the function and the return value. Then we'll add one for the module itself. The module docstring should be placed at the beginning of the module before any statements. Now when we request help on the module as a whole, we get quite a lot of useful information.

Documenting Your Code With Comments

Next, we'll introduce Python code comments. We believe docstrings are the right place for most documentation Python code. They explain how to consume the facilities your module provides rather than how it works. Ideally, your code should be clean enough that ancillary explanation is not required. Nevertheless, it's sometimes necessary to explain why a particular approach has been chosen or a particular technique used. And we can do that using Python comments. Comments in Python begin with a hash symbol and continue to the end of the line. Let's document the fact that it might not be immediately obvious why we are using sys.argv(1) rather than sys.argv(0). This is because the 0th argument of sys.argv is the module filename.

The Whole Shebang

And now the whole shebang. It's common on Unix-like systems to have the first line of a script include a special comment called a shebang. This begins with the usual hash as for any other comment followed by an exclamation mark. The shebang allows the program loader to identify which interpreter should be used to run the program. Shebangs have an additional purpose of conveniently documenting at the top of a file whether the Python code they're in is Python 2 or Python 3. The exact details of your shebang command depend on the location of Python on your system. Typical Python 3 shebangs use the Unix env program to locate Python 3 on your path environment variable, which importantly is compatible with Python virtual environments. A standard Python 3 shebang passes Python 3 to the user bin/env program. Don't worry if you're on Windows. Python includes machinery to make this work on Windows too. On Mac or Linux, we must mark our script as executable using the chmod command before the shebang will have any effect. Having done that, we can now run our script directly. Since Python 3.3, Python on Windows also supports the use of the shebang to make Python scripts directly executable with a correct version of the Python interpreter, even to the extent that shebangs that look like they should only work on Unix-like systems will work as expected on Windows. This works because Windows Python distributions now use a program called PyLauncher. PyLauncher, the executable for which is simply py.exe, will pass the shebang and locate the appropriate version of Python on your system. For example, on Windows in cmd shell, simply words.py followed by the URL as the command line argument will be sufficient to run your script with Python 3, even if you also have Python 2 installed. You can read more about PyLauncher on windows in PEP 397.

Summary

Let's review what we've covered in this module. Python code is placed in .py files called modules. Modules can be executed directly by passing them as the first argument to the Python interpreter. Modules can also be imported into the REPL, at which point all top-level statements in the module are executed in order. Named functions are defined using the def keyword followed by the function name and the argument list in parentheses. We can return objects from functions using the return statement, and return statements without a parameter return None, as does the implicit return at the end of every function body. We can detect whether a module has been imported or executed by examining the value of the special double underscore name variable. If it is equal to the string double underscore main, our module has been executed directly as a program. By executing a function if this condition is met using the top-level if __name__ == __main__ idiom at the end of our module, we can make our module both usefully importable and executable, an important technique even for short scripts. Module code is only executed once on first import. The def keyword is a statement, which binds executable code to a function name. Command line arguments can be accessed as a list of strings accessible through the argv attribute of the sys module. The 0th command line argument is the script filename, so the item at index 1 is the first true argument. Literal strings is the first line of a function definition from the function's docstring. They are typically triple quoted multiline strings containing usage information. Function documentation provided in docstrings can be retrieved using the Help function in the REPL. Module docstrings should be placed near the beginning of the module prior to any Python statements, such as import statements. Comments in Python commence with the hash character and continue to the end of the line. The first line of the module can contain a special comment called a shebang allowing the program loader to launch the correct Python interpreter on all major platforms. Next time here on Python Fundamentals, we'll dig into Python's object model, looking at how values are passed to and returned from functions. We investigate the nature of dynamic typing in Python and focus on the rules of variable scope. Thanks for watching, and we'll see you in the next module.

Objects

Introduction

Hello. My name is Austin Bingham. Welcome to the fourth module of the Python Fundamentals course where we seek to understand the Python object model, take a more in-depth look at some collection types we've met already, and introduce a few more collection types. We've already talked about and used variables in Python, but what exactly is a variable? What's going on when we do something as straightforward as assigning an integer to a variable? In this case, Python creates an int object with a value of 1000, an object reference with the name X, and arranges for X to refer to the int 1000 object. If we now modify the value of X with another assignment, what does not happen is a change in the value of the integer object. Integer objects in Python are immutable and cannot be changed. In fact, what happens is that Python creates a new immutable integer object with the value 500 and redirects the X reference to point at the new object. We now have no way of reaching the int 1000 object, and the Python garbage collector will reclaim it at some point. When we assign from one variable to another, we're really assigning from one object reference to another object reference, so both references now refer to the same object. If we now reassign X, we have X referring to an int 3000 object and Y referring to a separate int 500, and there is no work for the garbage collector to do because all objects are reachable from the live references. Let's dig a little deeper using the built-in id() function, which returns an integer identifier, which is unique and constant for the lifetime of the object. Let's rerun the previous experiment using id. Note that the id() function is seldom used in production Python code. Its main use is in object model tutorials such as this one, and as a debugging tool. Much more commonly used than the id() function is the is operator, which tests for equality of identity. That is it tests whether two references refer to the same object. We've already met the is operator earlier in the course when we tested for None. Even operations which seem naturally mutating in nature are not necessarily so. Consider the augmented assignment operator. Now let's look at that pictorially. We start with T referring to an int 5 object. Augmented assignment creates an int 2 without assigning a reference to it. It then adds the original int 5 with the new int 2 to produce a new int 7. Finally, it assigns T to the int 7 and the remaining ints are garbage collected. Python objects show this behavior for all types. The assignment operator only ever binds to names. It never copies an object by value. Let's look at another example using mutable objects, lists. We create a list object with three elements binding the list object to a reference named R, then assign R to a new reference S. When we modify the list referred to by S by changing the middle element, the R list has changed too since the names S and R in fact refer to the same object. Let's see that again with a diagram. First we assign R to a new list. We then assign S to R creating a new name for the existing list. If we modify S, we also modify R because we're modifying the same underlying object. S is R is true because both names refer to the same object. If you want to create an actual copy of an object such as a list, other techniques must be used, which we'll look at later. It turns out that Python doesn't really have variables in the metaphorical sense of a box holding a value. It only has named references to objects, and the references behave more like labels, which allow us to retrieve objects. That said, it's still common to talk about variables in Python. We will continue to do so secure in the knowledge that you now understand what's really going on behind the scenes. Let's contrast that behavior with a test for value equality or equivalence. We'll create two identical lists. Here we see that P and Q refer to different objects, but that the objects they refer to have the same value. Of course an object should always be equivalent to itself. Here's how that looks pictorially. We have two separate list objects each with a single reference to it. The values contained in the objects are the same. That is they are equivalent or value equal even though they have different identities. Value equality and identity are fundamentally different notions of equality, and it's important to keep them separate in your mind. It's also worth noting that value comparison is something that is defined programatically. When you define types, you can control how that class determines value equality. In contrast, identity comparison is defined by the language, and you can't change that behavior.

Argument Passing

Let's look at how all of this relates to function arguments and return values. Let's define a function at the REPL, which appends a value to a list and prints the modified list. First the list and then a function modify, which appends to and prints the list. The function accepts a single formal argument named K. We call modify passing our list M as a the actual argument, which indeed prints the modified list with four elements. But what does our list reference outside the function now refer to? The list referred to by M has been modified because it is the self-same list referred to by K inside the function. When we pass an object reference to a function, we're essentially assigning from the actual argument reference, in this case M, to the formal argument reference, in this case K. As we have seen, assignment causes the reference being assigned to refer to the same object as the reference being assigned from. This is exactly what's going on here. If you want a function to modify a copy of an object, it's the responsibility of the function to do the copying. Let's look at another example, first a new list F that refers the three elements, then a function which replaces the list, which we now call with the actual argument F. This is much as we'd expect; however, what's the value of F? F still refers to the original unmodified list. This time the function did not modify the object that was passed in. What's going on? Well, the object reference named F was assigned to the formal argument named G, so G and F did indeed refer to the same object just as in the previous example. However, on the first line of the function we reassigned the reference G to point it to a newly constructed list 17, 28, 45, so within the function the reference to the original 14, 23, 37 list was overwritten, although the unmodified object itself was still pointed to by the F reference outside the function. So, we see that it's quite possible to modify the objects through function argument references, but also possible to rebind the argument reference to new values. If you wanted to change the contents of the list and have the changes seen outside the function, you could modify the contents of the list like this, (Typing) and indeed the contents of F have been modified. Function arguments are transferred by what is called pass by object reference. This means that the value of the reference is copied into the function argument, not the value of the referred object. No objects are copied. The return statement uses the same pass by object reference semantics as function arguments. We can demonstrate this simply by writing a simple function which returns its only argument. Creating an object such as a list and passing it through this simple function returns the very same object we passed in showing that no copies of the list were made.

Function Arguments in Detail

Now that we understand the distinction between object references and objects, we'll look at some more capabilities of function arguments. The formal function arguments specified when a function is defined with the def keyword are a comma separated list of the argument names. These arguments can be made optional by providing default values. Consider a function which prints a simple banner to the console. This function takes two arguments, the second of which is provided with a default value, in this case a hyphen, in a literal string. When we define functions using default arguments, the parameters with default arguments must come after those without default; otherwise, we will get a syntax error. Within the body of the function, we multiply our border string by the length of the message string. This shows how we can determine the number of items in a Python collection using the built-in len function, and secondly how multiplying a string, in this case the single character string border, by an integer results in a new string containing the original string repeated a number of times. We use that feature here to make a string equal in length to our message. We then print the full-width border, the message, and the border again. When we call our banner function, we don't need to supply the border string because we provided a default value. However, if we do provide the option argument, it is used. In production code, this function call is not particularly self-documenting. We can improve that situation by naming the border argument at the call site. In this case, the message string is called a positional argument and the border string a keyword argument. The actual positional arguments are matched up in sequence with the formal arguments whereas the keyword arguments are matched by name. If we use keyword arguments for both of our parameters, we have the freedom to supply them in any order, although remember that all keyword arguments must be specified after the positional arguments. It's crucial to have an appreciation of exactly when the expression provided as a default argument value is evaluated to avoid a common pitfall which frequently ensnares newcomers to Python. Let's examine this question closely using the Python Standard Library time module. We can easily get the time as a readable string by using the ctime function of the time module. Let's write a function which uses a value retrieved from ctime as a default argument value. So far so good, but notice what happens when you call show_default() again a few seconds later, and again. The display time never progresses. Recall how we said that def is a statement that when executed binds a function definition to a function name. Well, the default argument expressions are evaluated only once when the def statement is executed. Normally this causes no problems when the default is a simple immutable constant such as an integer or a string, but it can be a confusing trap for the unwary that usually shows up in the form of using mutable collections as argument defaults. Let's take a closer look. Consider the function which uses an empty list as a default argument. It accepts a menu, which will be a list of strings; appends the item spam to the list; and returns the modified menu. Let's create a simple breakfast of bacon and eggs and naturally add spam to it. We'll do something similar for lunch. Nothing unexpected so far. But look what happens when you rely on the default argument by not passing an existing menu. When we append spam to an empty menu, we get just spam. Let's do that again. When we exercise the default the second time, we get two spams and three and four. What's happening here is that the empty list used for the default argument is created exactly once when the def statement is executed. The first time we fell back on the default this list has spam added to it. When we used the default the second time, the list still contains that item, and a second instance of spam is added to it making two ad infinitum, or perhaps ad nauseam would be more appropriate. The solution to this is straightforward, but perhaps not obvious. Always use immutable objects such as integers or strings for default values. Following this advice, we can solve this particular case by using the immutable None object as a sentinel. And now our add_spam function works as expected.

Python's Type System

Programming languages can be distinguished by several characteristics, but one of the most important is the nature of their type systems. Python can be characterized as having a dynamic and strong type system. Let's investigate what that means. Dynamic typing means that the type of an object reference isn't resolved until the program is running and needn't be specified up front when the program is written. Take a look at this simple function for adding two objects. Nowhere in this definition do we mention any types. We can use add with integers, floats, strings, or indeed any type for which the addition operator has been defined. These examples illustrate the dynamism of the type system. The two arguments A and B of the add function can reference any type of object. The term strong type system is less rigorously defined than dynamic, but a common definition is that the language will not in general implicitly convert objects between types. The strength of the Python type system can be demonstrated by attempting to add types for which addition has not been defined such as strings and floats. This produces a type error because Python will not in general perform implicit conversions between object types or otherwise attempt to coerce one type to another, the exception being the conversion to bool used for if statements and while-loop predicates.

Variable Scoping

As we have seen, no type declarations are necessary, and variables are essentially just untyped name bindings to objects. As such, they can be rebound or reassigned as often as necessary, even to objects of different types. But when we bind a name to an object, where is that binding stored? To answer that question, we must look at scopes and scoping rules in Python. There are four main types of scope in Python arranged in a hierarchy. Each scope is a context in which names are stored in which they can be looked up. The four scopes from narrowest to broadest are: Local, those names defined inside the current function. Enclosing, those names defined inside any and all enclosing functions. This scope isn't important for the contents of this Python fundamentals course. Global, those names defined at the top level of a module. Each module brings with it a new global scope. And finally Built-in, those names built into the Python language through the special built-ins module. Together these scopes comprise the LEGB rule. Names are looked up in the narrowest relevant context. It's important to note that scopes in Python do not correspond to the source code blocks as demarcated by indentation. For-loops, with-blocks, and the like do not introduce new nested scopes. Consider our words.py module. It contains the following global names: Main bound by the def main statement, sys bound when sys is imported, __name__ provided by the Python runtime, urlopen bound from the urllib request module, fetch_words bound by the def fetch_words statement, and print_items bound by the def print_items statement. Module scope name bindings are typically introduced by import statements and function or class definitions. It is possible to use other objects at module scope, and this is typically used for constants, although it can be used for variables. Within the fetch_words function we have the six local names: Word bound by the inner for-loop, line_words bound by assignment, line bound by the outer for-loop, story_words bound by assignment, url bound by the formal function argument, and story bound by the with statement. Each of these is brought into existence at first use and continues to live within the function scope until the function completes at which point the references will be destroyed. Very occasionally we need to rebind a global name at module scope from within a function. Consider the following simple module. If we save this module in scopes.py, we can import it into the REPL for experimentation. When show_count() is called, Python looks up the count name in the local namespace L, doesn't find it, so it looks in the next most outer namespace, in this case the global module namespace G where it finds the name count and prints the referred object. Now we call set_count with a new value and call show_count again. You might be surprised that show_count displays 0 after the call to set_count, so let's work through what's happening. When we call set_count, the assignment count = c binds the object referred to by the formal argument C to a new name count in the innermost namespace context, which is the scope of the current function. No lookup is performed for the global count at module scope. We have created a new variable which shadows and thereby prevents access to the global of the same name. To avoid this situation, we need to instruct Python to consider use of the count name in the set_count function to resolve to the count in the module namespace. We can do this by using the global keyword. Let's modify set_count to do so. Quit and restart the Python interpreter and exercise our revised module, which now demonstrates the required behavior.

Moment of Zen

Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules. We follow patterns not to kill complexity, but to master it. As we have shown, all variables in Python are references to objects, even basic types such as integers. This thorough approach to object-orientation is a strong theme in Python, and practically everything in Python is an object including functions and modules.

Everything Is an Object

In Python it's important to remember that everything is an object, primitive objects, functions, modules, and on and on. It's easy to see that when you start to explore even simple pieces of code. Let's go back to our words module and experiment with it further at the REPL. On this occasion we'll import just the module. The import statement binds a module object to the name words in the current namespace. We can determine the type of any object by using the type built-in function. If we want to see the attributes of an object, we can use the dir built-in function in a Python interactive session to introspect an object. The dir function returns a sorted list of the module attributes including the ones we defined such as the function fetch words, any imported names such as sys and urlopen, and various special attributes delimited by double underscores such as double underscore name and double underscore doc, which reveal the inner workings of Python. We can use the type function on any of these attributes to learn more about them. For instance, we can see that fetch_words is a function object. We can in turn call dir on the function to reveal its attributes, and we see that function objects have many special attributes to do with how Python functions are implemented behind the scenes. For now, we'll just look at a couple of simple attributes. As you might expect, this is the name of the function object as a string, and this is the docstring we provided. These give us some clues as to how the built-in help function might be implemented.

Summary

We've covered a lot of important concepts about how the Python language works in this module. Let's summarize what we've been over. Better to think of Python working in terms of named references to objects rather than variables and values. Assignment doesn't put a value in a box. It attaches a name tag to an object. Assigning from one reference to another puts two name tags on the same object. The Python garbage collector will reclaim unreachable objects, those objects with no name tag. The id() function returns a unique and constant identifier, which should rarely if ever be used in production. The is operator determines equality of identity, that is whether two names refer to the same object. We can test for equivalence using the double equals operator. Function arguments are passed by object reference, so functions can modify their arguments if they are mutable objects. If a formal function argument is rebound through assignment, the reference to the passed in object is lost. To change a mutable argument, you should replace its contents rather than replacing the whole object. The return statement also passes by object-reference. No copies are made. Function arguments can be specified with defaults. Default argument expressions are evaluated only once when the def statement is executed. Python uses dynamic typing, so we don't need to specify reference types in advance. Python uses strong typing. Types are not coerced to match. Python reference names are looked up in one of four nested scopes according to the LEGB rule: Local to functions, in Enclosing functions, in the Global or module namespace, and Built-ins. Global references can be read from a local scope. Assigning to global references from a local scope requires that the reference be declared global using the global keyword. Everything in Python is an object including modules and functions. They can be treated just like other objects. The import and def keywords result in binding to named references. The built-in type function can be used to determine the type of an object. The built-in dir function can be used to introspect an object and return a list of its attribute names. The name of a function or module object can be accessed through its double underscore name attribute. The docstring for a function or module object can be accessed through its double underscore doc attribute. In passing, we also saw that we can use len() to measure the length of a string. If we multiply a string by an integer, we get a new string with multiple copies of the operand string. This is called the repetition operation. Thanks for watching, and we'll see you in the next module.

Collections

Introduction

Hi. My name is Robert Smallshire. Welcome to the fifth module of the Python Fundamentals course where we look in more depth at the built-in collection types of the Python language and explore the various protocols that unite them. In this module we'll revisit some collection types we've already explored: Str or string, the immutable sequence of Unicode codepoints; list, the mutable sequence of objects; and dict, the mutable mapping from immutable keys to mutable objects. We'll also cover some new ones: Tuple, the immutable sequence of objects; range for arithmetic progressions of integers; and set, a mutable collection of unique immutable objects. We won't cover the bytes type further here. We've already discussed its essential differences with str, and most of what we learned about str can also be applied to bytes. This is not an exhaustive list of Python collection types, but it's completely sufficient for the overwhelming majority of Python 3 programs you'll encounter in the wild or are likely to write yourself. In this module we'll be covering these collections in this order, and then round off with an overview of the protocols that unite these collections, which allow them to be used in consistent and predictable ways. First up is tuple.

Tuple

Tuples in Python are immutable sequences of arbitrary objects. Once created, the objects within them cannot be replaced or removed, and new elements cannot be added. Tuples have a similar literal syntax to lists except that they are delimited by parentheses rather than square brackets. Here's a literal tuple containing a string, a float, and an integer. We can access the elements of a tuple by zero-based index using square brackets, and we can determine the number of elements in the tuple using the built-in len function. We can iterate over tuples using the for loop, and we can concatenate tuples using the plus operator. Tuples can be repeated using the multiplication operator. Since tuples can contain any object, it's perfectly possible to have nested tuples. We use repeated application of the indexing operator to get to the inner elements. Sometimes a single element tuple is required. To write this, we can't just use a simple number in parentheses. This is because Python pauses that as an integer enclosed in the president's controlling parentheses of a math expression. To create a single element tuple, we make use of the trailing comma separator, which we're allowed to use when specifying literal tuples, lists, and dictionaries. A single element with a trailing comma is passed as a single element tuple. This leaves us with the problem of how to specify an empty tuple. In actuality the answer is simple. We just use empty parentheses. In many cases, the parentheses of literal tuples may be omitted. This feature is often used when returning multiple values from a function. Here we make a function to return the minimum and maximum values of a series, the hard work being done by the two built-in functions min and max. Returning multiple values as tuple is often used in conjunction with a wonderful feature of Python called tuple unpacking. Tuple unpacking is a destructuring operation, which allows us to unpack data structures into named references. For example, we can assign the result of our minmax function to two new references like this. Tuple unpacking works with arbitrarily nested tuples, although not with other data structures. This in turn leads to the beautiful Python idiom for swapping two or more variables. Should you need to create a tuple from an existing collection object such as a list, you can use the tuple constructor, here also shown for strings. Finally, as with most collection types in Python, we can test for containment using the in operator or nonmembership with the not in operator. While that just about wraps up our look at tuple, let's move onto the next collection type.

String

We've covered strings at some length already, but we'll take time now to explore their capabilities in a little more depth. Recall that str is a homogeneous immutable sequence of Unicode codepoints, which for the most part we can consider to be the same as characters. Let's put str through its paces. As with any other Python sequence, we can determine the length of a string with a built-in len function. For instance, if we wanted to know how many characters were in the Welsh place name llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantysiliogogogoch, we could call len on this string and get the answer of 58. Concatenation of strings is supported using the plus operator. For instance, it's easy to turn "New" + "found" + "land" into Newfoundland, although for joining large numbers of strings the join method should be preferred because it's substantially more efficient. This is because concatenation using the addition operator or its augmented assignment version can lead to the generation of large numbers of temporaries with consequent costs for memory allocation and copies. Let's see how join is used. Join is a method on str which takes a collection of strings as an argument and produces a new string by inserting a separator between each of them. An interesting aspect of join is how the separator is specified. It is the string on which join is called. As with many parts of Python, an example is the best explanation. To join a list of HTML color code strings into a semicolon separated string, we call join on the separator we wish to use with a semicolon and pass in the list of strings to be joined. We can then split them up again using the split() method, which we've already encountered, but this time we're going to provide its optional argument. A widespread and fast path and idiom for concatenating together a collection of strings is to join using the empty string as the separator. The way may not be obvious at first. To concatenate, invoke join on empty text, something for nothing. This use of join is often confusing to the uninitiated, but with use the approach taken by Python will be appreciated as natural and elegant. Another very useful string method is partition(), which divides a string into three sections, the part before the separator, the separator itself, and the part after the separator. Partition returns a tuple, so this is commonly used in conjunction with tuple unpacking. Here we separate the string "London:Edinburgh" into three by partitioning around the colon. Often we're not interested in capturing the separator value, so you might see the underscore variable name used. This is not treated in a special way by the Python language, but there's an unwritten convention that the underscore variable is for unused or dummy values. This convention is supported by many Python aware development tools, which will suppress unused variable warnings for underscore. One of the most interesting and frequently used string methods is format. This supercedes, although does not replace, the string interpolation technique used in all the versions of Python and which we do not teach here. The format() method can be usefully called on any string containing so-called replacement fields, which are surrounded by curly braces. The objects provided as arguments to format are converted to strings and used to populate these fields. The field names, in this case 0 and 1, are matched up with the positional arguments to format, and each argument is converted to a string. A field name may be used more than once such as in this example. However, if the field names are used exactly once and in the same order as the arguments they can be omitted. If keyword arguments are supplied to formats, then named fields can be used instead of indexes. Note in this example how we've used the ability to split long statements over multiple lines so long as the split is inside open parentheses, brackets, or braces. In this case, we split the argument list with a format() method inside its open parentheses. This technique can greatly aid the formatting of Python code whilst keeping a manageable line length. It's possible to index into sequences using square brackets inside the replacement field. Here we've assigned a tuple to a variable pos, and then we pass pos as a keyword argument to format. We access the elements of pos inside the replacement fields within the string. We can even access object attributes. Here we pass the whole math module to format using a keyword argument. Remember, modules are objects too. Then we access two of its attributes from within the replacement fields, pi and e. Format strings also give us a lot of control over field alignment and floating point formatting. Here's the same with the constants displayed to only three decimal places. We don't cover all of the intricacies of the Python formatting mini language. If you want to know more, consult the documentation. Now we've covered the fundamentals of the string type. We recommend you spend some time familiarizing yourself with the other string methods. Remember, you can find out what they are using simply help str. Let's move on now and look at the next collection type.

Range

Let's move on and look at range, which really is a collection rather than a container. A range is a type of sequence used for representing an arithmetic progression of integers. Ranges are created by calls to the range constructor, and there is no literal form. Most typically we supply only the stop value. In this case we create a range from 0 to 5 simply by supplying the stop value of 5. Ranges are sometimes used to create consecutive integers for use as loop counters. Note that the stop value supplied to range is one past the end of the sequence, which is why the previous loop terminated at 4 and didn't print 5. We can also supply a starting value if we wish such as in this call range 5, 10. Wrapping this in a call to the list constructor is a handy way to force production of each item. The so-called half-open range convention with a stop value not being included in the sequence at first seems strange, but actually makes a lot of sense if you're dealing with consecutive ranges because the end specified by one range is the start of the next range. Range also supports a step argument, which controls the interval between successive numbers. Note that in order to use the step argument we must supply all three arguments. Range is curious in that it determines what its arguments mean by counting them. Providing only one argument means it is the stop value, two arguments are start and stop, and three arguments are start, stop, and step. Python's range works this way so the first argument start can be made optional, something which isn't normally possible. Furthermore, range doesn't support keyword arguments. You might almost describe it as unpythonic. At this point, we're going to show you another example of poorly styled Python code, one you can and should avoid. Here's a poor way to print the elements in a list using range, len, and list indexing. Although this works, it's most definitely unpythonic. Always prefer to use iteration over objects themselves. If for some reason you need a counter, you should use the built-in enumerate() function, which returns an iterable series of pairs, each pair being a tuple. The first element of the pair is the index of the current item, and the second element of the pair is the item itself. We can improve this even further by using tuple unpacking and avoiding having to deal directly with the tuple. Because of the strong iteration primitives built into Python, ranges aren't widely used in modern Python code. Let's move on and look at the next collection type.

List

We've already covered lists a little, and we've been making good use of them. We know how to create lists using the literal syntax, add to them using the append method, and get at and modify their contents using the square brackets indexing. Now let's take a deeper look. Let's start by making a list containing the words show how to index into sequences. We'll do this by calling the split method on a string. We're already familiar with how 0 and positive integers index the list from the front using a zero-based index. Here we extract the fifth element by using the index 4. One very convenient feature of lists and other Python sequences, for this applies to tuples too, is the ability to index from the end rather than from the beginning. This is achieved by supplying negative indexes. For example, we can access the fifth element from the end by supplying the index -5. The last element of the sequence is at index -1. Negative indexing is much more elegant than the clunky alternative of computing the forward index by subtracting the backward index from the length of the sequence. Note that indexing with -0 is the same as indexing with 0, returning the first element in the list. Because there is no distinction between 0 and -0, negative indexing is essentially one-based rather than zero-based. This is good to keep in mind if you're calculating indexes with even moderately complex logic. Off by one arrows can creep into negative indexing fairly easily. Slicing is a form of extended indexing which allows us to refer to portions of a list. To use it, we pass the start and stop indices of a half-open range separated by a colon as the square brackets index argument. Here we slice three words from the list by passing the start index 1 and the stop index 4. This facility can be combined with negative indexing. For example, to take all the elements except the first and last, slice between 1 and -1. Both the start and stop indices are optional. To slice all elements from the third to the end of the list, supply only 3: as the argument to the index operator. And to slice all elements from the beginning of the list up to, but not including the third, supply :3 as the argument to the index operator. Notice that these two lists together form the whole list demonstrating the convenience of the half-open range convention. Since both start and stop indices are optional, it's entirely possible to omit both and retrieve all of the elements, and indeed this last example is an important idiom for copying a list. This new list has a distinct identity, but an equivalent value. It's important to understand that although we have a new list object, which can be independently modified, the elements within it are references to the same objects referred to by the original list. In the event that these objects are both mutable and modified as opposed to replaced, the change will be seen in both lists. We teach this full slice list copying idiom because you're likely to see it in the wild, and it's not immediately obvious what it does. You should be aware that there are other more readable ways of copying a list such as the copy() method or even a simple call to the list() constructor passing the list to be copied. Largely, it's a matter of taste. Our preference is for the third form using the list() constructor since it has the advantage of working with any iterable series as the source and not just lists. You must be aware, however, that all of these techniques perform a shallow copy. That is, they create a new list containing the same object references as the source list, but don't copy the referred to objects.

Shallow Copies

To demonstrate this, we'll used nested lists with the inner list serving as mutable objects. Here's a list containing two elements, each of which is itself a list. Let's look at what's going on under the covers as Python constructs this data structure. First, two integer objects are created containing the values 1 and 2 respectively. The elements of the first inner list are references to these two integer objects. Now two more integer objects are created containing the values 3 and 4 respectively. The elements of the second inner list are references to these integer objects. Now the outer list is created, its elements containing references to the two inner lists. Finally, the reference named A is bound to the outer list. What happens when we copy the list? Here we use the full slice technique, but any of the three techniques we've shown will have the same effect. We're requesting a copy of outer list, so it's elements, which contain references to the two inner lists, are duplicated. These references refer to the same inner lists as the original list A. Once the list copy is complete, we bind a new reference named B to the new list. We can confirm that the lists are distinct objects by testing with A is B, which returns False. They do, however, contain equivalent values, which we can test with A == B, which returns True. Not only are the elements at a(0) and b(0) equivalent, they actually refer to the same inner list object. Now let's replace the element at a(0) with a new list containing 8 and 9. This results in the construction of two new integer objects containing 8 and 9 respectively and the new list, the elements of which are references to these two new integer objects. The reference in a(0) is redirected to point to this new inner list object, and we can confirm that a(0) now indeed points to the new list while b(0) is unmodified. What happens if we now append to the inner list referred to by a(1)? Let's append a new integer object containing the value 5. The new integer object is created and is referred to by an additional element in the inner list referred to by a(1), so a(1) now refers to a list containing integers 3, 4, 5. Significantly, because a(1) and b(1) refer to the same inner list, the list accessible through b(1) has also been modified. Following these manipulations, the data structure referred to by A is a list containing two elements, each of which itself is a list. The first inner list contains 8 and 9, and the second inner list contains 3, 4, and 5. The data structure referred to by B is also a list containing two inner lists. The first element refers to a list containing 1 and 2, and the second element also refers to the 3, 4, 5 list.

List Repetition

As for strings and tuples, lists support repetition using the multiplication operator. It's simple enough to use. Here we repeat a list containing the integers 21 and 37 four times. This form is rarely spotted in the wild. It's most often used for initializing a list of size known in advance to a constant value such as 0. Here we create a list initialized with nine 0 elements. Be aware though that in the case of mutable elements the same trap for the unwary that occurred with list copying lurks here since repetition will repeat the reference without copying the value. Let's demonstrate using nested lists as our mutable elements again. We'll repeat a list five times. The mutable element it contains will be another list containing elements, two -1 and +1. Let's see what Python needs to do to construct this data structure. First, two integer objects are created containing the values -1 and +1 respectively. These are referred to by the two elements of the inner list. Python then creates the outer list and the ranges for its single element to contain a reference to the inner list. Now the repetition operation is applied. A new list is created containing five elements, each of which contains a copy of the single element in the original outer list. All of these elements contain references to the same inner list object. Now the temporary single element outer list can be disposed of. Finally, this whole data structure is bound to a new named reference, S. As expected, S contains five elements, each of which is the -1, +1 in a list. Now let's append the integer 7 to the fourth inner list at index 3 in the outer list. This creates a new integer object and a new element on the inner list containing a reference to that integer object. We can see that all of the elements of the outer list have been modified because they do in fact all refer to the same inner list.

More on List

To find an element in a list, use the index method passing the object you're searching for. The elements are compared for equivalence or value equality until the one you're looking for is found and its index returned. Here we create a list W containing the words the quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog using the string split method. Searching for fox using the index method returns the integer 3, which of course allows us to get ahold of that element. If you search for a value that isn't present like unicorn, you will receive a ValueError, which we'll learn how to handle gracefully in the next module. Another means of searching is to count matching elements using the count method. Here we count occurrences of the word the. If you just want to test for membership, you can use the in operator or for nonmembership using the not in operator. Elements are removed from lists using a keyword with which we have not yet become acquainted, del. The del keyword takes a single parameter, which is a reference to a list element and removes it from the list shortening the list in the process. Here we make a string U containing the words jackdaws love my big sphinx of quartz using the string split method. We can delete the fourth element using del u(3) leaving jackdaws love my sphinx of quartz. It's also possible to remove elements by value rather than by position using the remove method. Here we pass jackdaws to that method giving us love my sphinx of quartz. This is of course equivalent to using the del statement and the index method in combination. Attempting to remove an item which is not present such as pyramid results in a ValueError. Items can be inserted into lists using the insert method, which accepts the index of the new item and the new item itself. Here we create a list A containing the words I accidently the whole universe. We insert the word destroyed at index 2 using a call to the insert method giving us I accidentally destroyed the whole universe. We can covert this list of words back into a string by calling the string join operator on a space separator.

Growing Lists

Concatenating lists using the addition operator results in a new list without modification of the operands whereas the augmented assignment operator += modifies the assignee in place. This can also be achieved using the extend() list method. All of these techniques work with any iterable series, not just lists on the right hand side.

Reversing and Sorting Lists

Before we move on from lists, let's look at two operations which rearrange the elements in place, reversing and sorting. A list can be reversed in place simply by calling its reverse() method. Similarly, a list can be sorted in place using the sort() method. The sort() method accepts two optional arguments, key and reverse. The latter is self-explanatory, and when set to true gives a descending sort. The key parameter is more interesting. It accepts any callable object, which is then used to extract a key from each item. The items will then be sorted according to the relative ordering of these keys. There are several types of callable objects in Python, although the only one we have encountered so far is the humble function. For example, the built-in len function is a callable object, which is used to determine the length of the collection such as a string. Consider the following list of words: Not perplexing do handwriting family where I illegibly know doctors. By passing a reference to the len function as the key argument to the sort() method of the H list, we can order these words in order of length. Again, we can join the list of words back together with a call to the join operator on a space separator giving the almost sentence I do not know where family doctors illegibly perplexing handwriting. Sometimes an insitu sort or reversal is not what is required. For example, it may cause a function argument to be modified giving the function confusing side effects, which it would not otherwise have. For out of place equivalence of the reverse and sort list methods, you can use the reversed and sorted built- in functions, which return a reverse iterator and a new sorted list respectively. Here we use sorted() to sort a list of numbers, X, which returns a new list, Y. Notice that the original list X is unmodified. Here we use reversed() to reverse a list of numbers, P. Notice how we need to use the list constructor to evaluate the result of reversed. This is because reversed returns an iterator, a topic we will cover in much more detail later. These two functions have the advantage that they'll work on any finite length iterable source object. We've learned a lot about lists in this section together with some more general techniques such as slicing that can be used with other sequences including tuples and strings. Let's move on and look at the next collection type.

Dictionary

We'll now return to dictionaries, which lie at the heart of many Python programs including the Python interpreter itself. We briefly looked at literal dictionaries previously seeing how they are delimited with curly braces and contain comma separated key-value pairs with each pair tied together by a colon. The values are accessible via the keys. The keys must be unique within any single dictionary, although it's fine to have duplicate values so long as they're associated with different keys. Internally the dictionary maintains pairs of references to the key objects and the value objects. The key objects must be immutable, so strings, numbers, and tuples are fine, but lists are not. The value objects can be mutable, and in practice often are. Our example URL map uses strings for both keys and values, which is fine. You should never rely on the order of items in the dictionary. It's essentially random and may even vary between different runs of the same program. As for the other collections, there's also a named constructor, dict(), which can covert other types to the dictionaries. We can use the constructor to copy from an iterable series of key-value pairs stored in tuples like this. Recall that the items in a dictionary are not stored in any particular order. So long as the keys are legitimate Python identifiers, it's even possible to create a dictionary directly from keyword arguments passed the dict. As with lists, dictionary copying is shallow by default copying only the references to the key and value objects, not the value objects themselves. There are two means of copying a dictionary of which we most commonly see the second. The first technique is to use the copy() method. Here we copy a dictionary of color codes. Note that we supply them in hexadecimal, but they're echoed back to us in decimal. The second means of copying is simply to pass an existing dictionary to the dict constructor. If you need to extend a dictionary with definitions from another dictionary, you can use the update() method. This is called on the dictionary to be updated and passed the contents of the dictionary, which is to be merged in. Here we merge in some additional color codes into our existing dictionary. If the argument to update includes keys which are already present in the target dictionary, the values associated with these keys are replaced in the target by the corresponding values from the source. As we have seen in an earlier module, dictionaries are iterable, so they can be used with for loops. The dictionary yields the next key on each iteration, and we retrieve the corresponding value by lookup using the square brackets operator. Notice that the keys are returned in an arbitrary order, which is neither the order in which they were specified nor any other meaningful sort order. If we want to iterate over only the values, we can use the values() dictionary method. This returns an object which provides an iterable view onto the dictionary values without causing the values to be copied. There is no efficient or convenient way to retrieve the corresponding key from a value, so we only print the values here in this example. In the interest of symmetry, there's also a keys() method which provides a view onto the keys of the dictionary, although it's not often used because default iteration of dictionaries is by key. Often though we want to iterate over the keys and values in tandem. Each key-value pair in a dictionary is called an item, and we can get ahold of an iterable view of the items using the items() dictionary method. When iterated over, the items view yields each key-value pair as a tuple. By using tuple unpacking in the for statement, we can get both the key and value in one operation without the extra lookup. The membership test for dictionaries use the in and not in operators and work only on the keys. Here we create a dictionary mapping ISO currency codes to Unicode currency symbols. We use the membership testing operators to show that the New Zealand dollar is in the list of symbols whereas the Macedonian Denar is not in the list of symbols. Here we use the del keyword to remove the fictional element unobtainium from our periodic table. The keys in a dictionary should be immutable, although the values can be modified. Here's a dictionary which maps the element symbol to a list of mass numbers for different isotopes of that element. See how we split the dictionary literal over multiple lines. That's allowed because the curly braces for the dictionary literal are open at the point of the line break as string keys are immutable, which is a good thing for the correct functioning of the dictionary, but there's no problem with modifying the dictionary values in the event that we discover some new isotopes. Here the augmented assignment operator is applied to the list object accessed through the H for hydrogen key. The dictionary is not being modified at all here, but the list is being extended. Of course the dictionary itself is mutable. We know we can add new items. Here we add three isotopes of nitrogen. With compound data structures such as our table of isotopes, it can be helpful to have them printed out in a much more readable form. We can do this with the Python Standard Library pretty printing module called pprint, which contains a function called pprint. To use it, it's best to do something like from pprint import pprint as pp. If we didn't bind the pprint function to a different name pp, the function reference would overwrite the module reference preventing further access to the contents of the module. Arguably it's poor design to have a module containing functions of the same name because of this issue. Anyway, by using pp(m) we get a much more comprehensible display of our table of isotopes. Let's move on from dictionaries and look at a new built-in data structure we have not yet met, the set.

Set

The set data type is an unordered collection of unique elements. The collection is mutable in so far as elements can be added and removed from the set, but each element must itself be immutable very much like the keys of a dictionary. Sets have a literal form very similar to dictionaries, again delimited by curly braces, but each item is a single object rather than a pair joined by a colon. Note that the set is unordered and of course has type set. Recall that empty curly braces create an empty dictionary, so to create an empty set we must resort to the set() constructor with no arguments. This is the form that Python echoes back to us too. The set() constructor can create a set from any iterable series such as a list. Duplicates are discarded. In fact, a common use of sets is to efficiently remove duplicate items from a series of objects. Here we remove duplicates from the list 1, 4, 2, 1, 7, 9, 9 resulting in the set 1, 2, 4, 9, 7. Naturally sets are iterable, although the order is arbitrary. Membership is a fundamental operation for sets, and as with the other collection types is performed using the in and not in operators. To add a single element to the set, simply use the add method. Adding an element that already exists has no effect, and neither does it produce an error. Multiple elements can be added in one go from any iterable series including another set using the update method. Two methods are provided for removing elements from sets. The first, remove, requires that the element to be removed is present in the set; otherwise, a KeyError is given. The second method discard is less fussy and simply has no effect if the item is not a member of the set. As with the other built-in collections, set sports a copy() method, which performs a shallow copy of the set copying references, but not the objects they refer to. As we have already shown, the set constructor may also be used. Perhaps the most useful aspect of the set type is group of powerful set algebra operations which are provided. These allow us to easily compute set unions, set differences, and set intersections and to evaluate whether two sets have subset, superset, or disjoint relations. To demonstrate these methods, we'll construct some sets of people according to various phenotypes. Olivia, Harry, Lily, Jack, and Amelia have blue eyes. Harry, Jack, Amelia, Mia, and Joshua have blond hair. Only Harry and Amelia can smell hydrogen cyanide. Harry, Lily, Amelia, and Lola can taste phenylthiocarbamide or PTC. Mia, Joshua, Lily, and Oliva have O type blood, Amelia and Jack have B type blood, Harry has A type blood, and Joshua and Lola have AB type blood. To find all the people with blond hair, blue eyes, or both, we can use the union method, which collects together all of the elements, which are in either or both set. We can demonstrate that union is a commutative operation. That is, we can swap the order of the operands using the value equality operator to check for equivalence of the resulting sets. To find all the people with blond hair and blue eyes, we can use the set intersection method, which collects together only the elements which are present in both sets. This is also commutative. To identify the people with blond hair who don't have blue eyes, we can use the set difference method. This finds all of the elements which are in the first set, which are not in the second set. This is non-commutative because the people with blond hair who don't have blue eyes are not the same as the people who have blue eyes, but don't have blond hair. However, if you want to determine which people have exclusively blond hair or blue eyes, but not both, we can use the symmetric_difference method. This collects all the elements which are in the first set or the second set, but not both. As you can tell from the name, symmetric_difference is indeed commutative. In addition, three predicate methods are provided, which tell us about the relationships between sets. We can check whether one set is the subset of another set using the issubset method. For example, to check whether all of the people who can smell hydrogen cyanide also have blond hair, you smell_hcn.issubset(blond_hair). This checks that all of the elements of the first set are also present in the second set. To test whether all of the people who can taste phenylthiocarbamide can also taste hydrogen cyanide, use the issuperset method. To test that two sets have no members in common, use the isdisjoint method. For example, your blood type is either A or O, never both. We encourage you to experiment with these methods and become comfortable using them. They can make for some very elegant solutions.

Collection Protocols

That completes our tour of the collection types in Python, but we're not quite finished. Let's complete this module by looking at the protocols which unite these collections and allow them to be used in standard ways. In Python, a protocol is a set of operations or methods that a type must support if it is to implement that protocol. Protocols needn't be defined in the source code as separate interfaces or base classes as they would in an anomaly typed language such as C# or Java. It's sufficient to simply have an object provide functioning implementations of those operations. We can organize the different collections we've encountered in Python according to which protocols they support. Support for protocol demands specific behavior from a type. As you can see from this table, most of the collection types we've looked at support the container, size, and iterable protocols. Many of them are also sequences. The immutable protocols are each represented by only one type we have encountered. The container protocol requires that membership testing using the in and not in operators be supported. The size protocol requires that the number of elements in a collection can be determined by passing the collection to the built-in len function. Iteration is such an important concept we're devoting a whole module to it later in this course. In short though, iterables provide a means of yielding elements one-by-one as they're requested. One important property of iterables is that they can be used with for loops. The sequence protocol requires that items can be retrieved using square brackets with an integer index, that items can be searched for with the index method, that items can be counted with the count method, and that a reversed copy of the sequence can be produced with the reversed built-in function. We won't cover the mutable sequence, mutable mapping, and mutable set protocols here since we've only covered one representative of each protocol, so the generality afforded by the protocol concept doesn't gain as much as this juncture.

Summary

We've covered a lot of ground in this module. Let's try to summarize. Tuples are immutable sequence types. They have a literal syntax, which is optional parentheses, around a comma separated list. Notably, the optional trailing comma must be used for single element tuples to disambiguate them from parenthesized integers. Tuples are particularly useful for multiple return values from functions, and tuple unpacking useful for destructuring those return values. Tuple unpacking also has an interesting idiomatic use for swapping variables. Strings are also immutable sequence types, but specifically of Unicode codepoints. String concatenation is most efficiently performed with the join() method rather than with the addition or augmented assignment operators. The partition() method is a useful and elegant string parsing tool, and the format() method provides a powerful means of replacing placeholders with stringified values. Range objects are immutable sequence types which represent arithmetic progressions of evenly spaced integer values. Range is sometimes used to generate counters in loops, although the enumerate() built-in function is often a superior alternative. Lists are the only mutable sequence type we have seen and are very widely used. Lists support indexing forward using positive or 0 integers and the indexing from the end with negative indices. The slice syntax allows us to copy all or part of a list. The full slice is a common Python idiom for copying lists, although the copy() method and the list() constructor are less obscure. List and other collection copies in Python are shallow copies. References are copied, but objects are not. Dictionaries are mapping types, which map from keys to values. The keys must be immutable objects whereas the values may be mutable. Iteration and membership testing with dictionaries is done with respect to the keys. The keys(), values(), and items() methods provide views onto the different aspects of a dictionary allowing convenient iteration. Sets store an unordered collection of unique elements. Sets support powerful set algebra operations and predicates. The built-in collections are organized according to which protocols they support such as iterable, sequence, and mapping. In passing we have also found out that underscore is in common usage used for dummy or superfluous variables and that the pprint module supports pretty printing of compound data structures. Well, that just about wraps it up for this module on Python's collections. Next time we'll look at exception handling so we can deal with those occasional value and key errors we've encountered, learn the error of our ways with respect to return codes, and see that it's always easier to ask for forgiveness than for permission. Thanks for watching, and we'll see you in the next module.

Handling exceptions

Introduction

Hello. My name is Austin Bingham. Welcome to the sixth module of the Python Fundamentals course where we introduce exception handling techniques. Exception handling is a mechanism for stopping normal program flow and continuing at some surrounding context or code block. The event of interrupting normal flow is called the act of raising an exception. In some enclosing context the raise exception must be handled upon which control flow if transferred to the exception handler. If an exception propagates up the call stack to the start of the program, then an unhandled exception will cause the program to terminate. And exception object containing information about where and why an exceptional event occurred is transported from the point at which the exception was raised to the exception handler so that the handler can interrogate the exception object and take appropriate action. If you've used exceptions in other popular imperative languages like C++ or Java, then you've already got a good idea of how exceptions work in Python. There have been long and tiresome debates over exactly what constitutes an exceptional event, the core issue being that exceptionality is in reality a matter of degree, some things are more exceptional than others, whereas programming languages impose a false dichotomy by insisting that an event is entirely exceptional or not at all exceptional. The Python philosophy is at the liberal end of the spectrum when it comes to the use of exceptions. Exceptions are ubiquitous in Python, and it's crucial to understand how to handle them.

Exceptions and Control Flow

Since exceptions are a means of control flow, they can be clumsy to demonstrate at the REPL, so for this part of the course we'll be using a Python module to contain our code. Let's start with a very simple module we can use for exploring these important concepts and behaviors. Place this code in a module called exceptional.py. Import the convert function from this module into the Python REPL and call our function with a string to see that it has the desired effect. But if we call our function with an object that can't be converted to an integer, we get a traceback from the int call. What's happened here is that the int constructor raised an exception because it couldn't sensibly perform the conversion. We didn't have a handler in place, so it was caught by the REPL and the stack trace was displayed. The ValueError referred to in the stack trace is the type of the exception object, and the error message invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'hedgehog' is part of the payload of the exception object that has been retrieved and printed by the REPL. Notice the exception propagates across several levels in the call stack.

Handling Exceptions

Let's make our convert function more robust by handling the ValueError using a try except construct. Both the try and except keywords introduce new blocks. The try block contains code that could raise an exception, and the except block contains the code which performs error handling in the event that an exception is raised. We have decided that if a non-integer string is supplied we'll return -1. To reinforce your understanding of the control flow here, we'll add a couple of print statements. Modify the convert function to look like this. Let's test this interactively after restarting the REPL. (Typing) Note how the print in the try block after the point at which the exception was raised was not executed when we passed in giraffe. Instead, execution was transferred directly to the first statement of the except block. The int constructor only accepts numbers in strings, so let's see what happens if we feed an object of another type into it, say a list. This time our handler didn't intercept the exception. If we look closely at the trace, we can see that this time we receive a TypeError, a different type of exception. Each try block can have multiple corresponding except blocks, which intercept exceptions of different types. Let's add a handler for TypeError too. Now if we rerun the same test in a fresh REPL we find that TypeError is handled too. We've got some code duplication between our two exception handlers with that duplicated print statement and assignment. We'll move the assignment in front of the try block, which doesn't change the behavior of the program. Then we'll exploit the fact that both handlers did the same thing by collapsing them into one using the ability of the except statement to accept a tuple of exception types. Now we see that everything still works as designed.

Programmer Errors

Now that we're confident with the control flow for exception behavior, we can remove the print statements. But now when we try to import our program, we get yet another type of exception, an IndentationError because our except block is now empty, and empty blocks are not permitted in Python programs. This is not an exception type that is ever useful to catch with an except block. Almost anything that goes wrong with the Python program results in an exception, but some such as IndentationError, SyntaxError, and NameError are the result of programmer errors, which should be identified and corrected during development rather than handled at runtime. The fact that these things are exceptions is mostly useful if you're creating a Python development tool such as a Python IDE, embedding Python itself in a larger system to support application scripting, or designing a plug-in system, which dynamically loads code. With that said, we still have the problem of what to do with our empty except block. The solution arrives in the form of the pass keyword, which is a special statement which does precisely nothing. It's a NOOP, and its only purpose is to allow us to construct syntactically permissible blocks which are semantically empty. Perhaps in this case though it would be better to simplify further and just use multiple return statements and do away with the X variable completely. Sometimes we'd like to get ahold of the exception object, in this case an object of type ValueError or TypeError and interrogate it for more details of what went wrong. We can get a named reference to the exception object by tacking an as clause onto the end of the except statement. We'll modify our function to print a message with exception details to the standard error stream before returning. To print a standard error, we need to get a reference to the stream from the sys module, so at the top of our module we'll need to import sys. We can then pass sys.stderr as a keyword argument called file to the print function. We take advantage of the fact that exception objects can be converted to strings using the str constructor. Now let's see that at the REPL.

Imprudent Error Codes

Let's add a second function string_log to our module, which calls our convert function and computes the natural log of the result. At this point we must confess that we've gone out of way here to be deeply unpythonic by wrapping the perfectly good int conversion included with Python, which raises exceptions on failure, in our convert function, which returns a good old fashioned negative error code. Rest assured that this unforgivable Python heresy has been committed solely to demonstrate the greatest folly of error return codes, that they can be ignored by the caller wreaking havoc amongst unsuspecting code later in the program. A slightly better program might test the value of V before proceeding to the log call. Without such a check, log will of course fail when passed the negative error code value. Naturally, the log failure causes the raising of another exception. Much better, and altogether more Pythonic, is to forget about error codes completely and go back to rasing an exception from convert.

Re-Raising Exceptions

Instead of returning an unpythonic error code, we can simply omit our error message and re-raise the exception object we're currently handling. This can be done by replacing the return -1 with raise at the end of our exception handling block. Without a parameter, raise simply re-raises the exception that is being currently handled. Testing in the REPL, we can see that the original exception type is re-raised whether it's a ValueError or a TypeError, but our conversion error message has printed a standard error along the way.

Exceptions as APIs

Exceptions form an important aspect of the API of a function. Callers of a function need to know which exceptions to expect under various conditions so that they can ensure appropriate exception handlers are in place. We'll use a square root finding as an example using a home-grown square root function courtesy of Heron of Alexandria, although he probably didn't use Python. Place the following code in a file called roots.py. There's only one language feature in this program we haven't met before, the logical and operator, which we use in this case to test that two conditions are true on each iteration of the loop. Python also includes a logical or operator, which can be used to test whether either or both operands are true. Running our program, we can see that Heron was really onto something. Let's add a new line to the main() function, which takes the square root of -1. If we run that, we get a new exception. What has happened is that Python has intercepted a division by 0, which occurs on the second iteration of the loop and raises an exception, a ZeroDivisionError. Let's modify our code to catch the exception before it propagates up to the top of the call stack, thereby causing our program to stop using the try except construct. Now when we run the script we see that we're handling the exception cleanly. We should be careful to avoid a beginner's mistake of having two tight scopes for exception handling blocks. We can easily use one try except blocks for all of our calls to square root. We also need a third print statement to show how execution of the enclosed block is terminated. This is an improvement on what we started with, but most likely users of a square root function don't expect it to throw a ZeroDivisionError. Python provides us with several standard exception types to signal common errors. If a function parameter is supplied with an illegal value, it is customary to raise a ValueError. We can do this by using the raise keyword with a newly created exception object, which we can create by calling the ValueError constructor. There are two places we could deal with the division by zero. The first approach would be to wrap the root finding while loop in a try except ZeroDivisionError construct and then raise a new ValueError exception from inside the exception handler. This would be wasteful though. We know this routine will fail with negative numbers, so we can detect this free condition early on and raise an exception at that point. This is a simple if statement and a call to raise passing the new exception object. The ValueError constructor accepts an error message. See how we also modify the docstring to make it plain which exception type will be raised by a square root and under what circumstances. But look what happens if we run the program. We're still getting a traceback and an ungraceful program exit. This happens because we forgot to modify our exception handler to catch ValueError rather than ZeroDivisionError. Let's modify our calling code to catch the right exception class and also assign the caught exception object to a named variable so we can interrogate it after it has been caught. In this case, our interrogation is simply to print the exception object, which knows how to display itself as the message to standard error. Running the program again, we can see that our exception is being handled gracefully.

Exceptions, APIs, and Protocols

Again, exceptions are part of a function's API, and more broadly they are part of certain protocols. For example, objects which implement the sequence protocol should raise and IndexError exception for indices which are out of range. The exceptions which are raised are as much a part of a function's specification as the arguments it accepts, and as such must be implemented and documented appropriately. There are a handful of common exception types in Python, and usually when you need to raise an exception in your own code one of the built-in types is a good choice. Much more rarely you'll need to define new exception types, but we don't cover that in this course. Often if you're deciding what exceptions your code should raise, you should look for similar cases in existing code. The more your code follows existing patterns, the easier it will be for people to integrate and understand. For example, suppose you are writing a key value database. It would be natural to use KeyError to indicate a request for a nonexistent key because this is how dictionary works. That is, mapping in Python follows certain patterns, and exceptions are part of that pattern. Let's look at a few common exception types. IndexError is raised when an integer index is out of range. You can see this when you index pass the end of a list. ValueError is raised when the object is of the right type, but contains an inappropriate value. We've seen that already when trying to construct an int from a non-numeric string. KeyError is raised when a look-up in a mapping fails. You can see that here when we look up a non-existent key in a dictionary.

Do Not Guard Against Type Errors

We tend to not protect against TypeErrors in Python. To do so runs against the grain of dynamic typing in Python and limits the reuse potential of the code that we write. For example, we could test whether an argument was an int using the built-in isinstance function and raise a TypeError exception if it was not, but then we'd also want to allow arguments that are instances of float as well. It soon gets complicated if we want to check whether our function will work with types such as rational, complex, or any other kind of number. And in any case, who's to say that it does? Alternatively, we could intercept TypeError inside our square root function and re-raise it, but to what end? Usually in Python it's not worth adding type checking to your functions. If a function works with a particular type, even one you couldn't have known about when you designed your function, then that's all to the good. If not, execution will probably result in a TypeError anyway. Likewise, we tend to not catch TypeErrors very frequently either.

EAFP vs. LBYL

Now let's look at another tenant of Python philosophy and culture, the idea that it's easier to ask forgiveness than permission. There are only two approaches to dealing with a program operation that might fail. The first approach is to check that all the preconditions for a failure-prone operation are met in advance of attempting the operation. The second approach is to blindly hope for the best, but be prepared to deal with the consequences if it doesn't work out. In Python culture, these two philosophies are known as Look Before You Leap, LBYL, and It's Easier to Ask Forgiveness than Permission, EAFP, which incidentally was coined by Rear Admiral Grace Hopper, inventor of the compiler. Python is strongly in favor of EAFP because it puts primary logic for the happy path in its most readable form with deviations from the normal flow handled separately rather than interspersed with the main flow. Let's consider an example, processing a file. The details of the processing aren't relevant. All we need to know is that the process_file function will open a file and read some data from it. First the LBYL version. Before attempting to call process_file, we check that the files exists, and if it doesn't we avoid making the call and print a helpful message instead. There are several problems with this approach, some obvious and some insidious. One obvious problem is that we only perform an existence check. What if the file exists, but contains garbage? What if the path refers to a directory instead of a file? According to LBYL, we should add preemptive tests for these too. A more subtle problem is that there is a race condition here. It's possible for the file to be deleted, for example by another process, between the existence check and the process_file call, a classic atomicity issue. There's really no good way to deal with this. Handling of errors from process_file will be needed in any case. Now consider the alternative using the more Pythonic EAFP approach. Here we simply attempt the operation without checks in advance, but we have an exception handler in place to deal with any problems. We don't even need to know in a lot of detail exactly what might go wrong. Here we catch OSError, which covers all manner of conditions such as file not found and using directories where files are expected. EAFP is standard in Python, and that philosophy is enabled by exceptions. Without exceptions, that is using error codes instead, you are forced to include error handling directly in the main flow of the logic. Since exceptions interrupt the main flow, they allow you to handle exceptional cases non-locally. Exceptions coupled with EAFP are also superior because unlike error codes exceptions cannot be easily ignored. By default, exceptions have a big effect whereas error codes are silent by default, so the exception EAFP- base style makes it very difficult for problems to be silently ignored.

Clean-Up Actions

Sometimes you need to perform a cleanup action irrespective of whether an operation succeeds. In a later module we'll introduce context managers, which are the modern solution to this common situation, but here we'll introduce the tryfinally construct since creating a context manager can be overkill in simple cases. And in any case, an understanding of tryfinally is useful for making your own context managers. Consider this function, which uses various facilities of the Standard Library's OS module to change the current working directory, create a new directory at that location, and then restore to the original working directory. At first sight this seems reasonable, but should the call to os.mkdir fail for some reason, the current working directory of the Python process won't be restored to its original value, and the make_at function will have had an unintended side effect. To fix this, we'd like the function to restore the original current working directory under all circumstances. We can achieve this with a tryfinally block. Code in the finally-block is executed whether execution leaves the try-block normally by reaching the end of the block or exceptionally by an exception being raised. This construct can be combined with except blocks, here used to add a simple further logging facility. Now if the os.mkdir call raises an OSError, the OS handler will be run, and the exception will be re-raised. But since the finally block is always run no matter how the try block ends, we can be sure that the final directory change will take place in all circumstances.

Moment of Zen

Errors should never pass silently, unless explicitly silenced. Errors are like bells, and if we make them silent they are of no use.

Platform-Specific Code

Detecting a single keypress from Python such as the press any key to continue functionality at the console requires use of operating system specific modules. We can't use the built-in input function because that waits for the user to press Return before giving us a string. To implement this on Windows, we need to use functionality from the Windows only msvcrt module, and on Linux and Mac OS X we need to use functionality from the Unix only tty and termios modules in addition to the sys module. This example is quite instructive as it demonstrates many Python language features including import and def as statements as opposed to declarations. Recall the top level module code is executed on first import. Within the first try block we attempt to import msvcrt, the Microsoft Visual C runtime. If this succeeds, we then proceed to define a function getkey(), which delegates to the msvcrt.getch() function. Even though we are inside a try block at this point, the function will be declared at the current scope, which is the module scope. If, however, the import of msvcrt fails because we're not running on Windows, an ImportError will be raised, and execution will transfer to the except block. This is a case of an error being silenced explicitly because we're going to attempt an alternative course of action in the exception handler. Within the except block we import three modules needed for a getkey() implementation on Unix-like systems, and then proceed to the alternative definition of getkey(), which again binds the function implementation to a name in the module scope. This Unix implementation of getkey() uses a tryfinally construct to restore various terminal attributes after the terminal has been put into raw mode for the purposes of reading a single character. In the event that our program is running on neither Windows nor a Unix-like system, the import tty statement will raise a second import error. This time we make no attempt to intercept this exception. We allow it to propagate to our caller, which is whatever attempted to import this keypress module. We know how to signal this error, but not how to handle it, so we defer that decision to our caller. The error will not pass silently. If the caller has more knowledge or alternative tactics available, it can in turn intercept this exception and take appropriate action, perhaps degrading to using Python's input built-in function and giving a different message to the user.

Summary

We've tackled a complicated subject in this module, so let's see if we can sum up. The raising of an exception interrupts normal program flow and transfers control to an exception handler. Exception handlers are defined using the tryexcept construct. Try blocks define a context in which exceptions can be detected. Corresponding except blocks define handlers for specific types of exceptions. Python uses exceptions pervasively, and many built-in language features depend on them. Except blocks can capture an exception object, which is often of a standard type such as a ValueError, KeyError, or IndexError. Programmer errors such as indentation error and syntax error should not normally be handled. Exceptional conditions can be signaled using the raise keyword, which accepts a single parameter of an exception object. Raise without an argument with an except block re-raises the exception which is currently being processed. We tend to not to routinely check for TypeErrors. To do so would negate the flexibility afforded to us by Python's dynamic type system. Exception objects can be converted to strings using the str() constructor for the purposes of printing message payloads. The exceptions thrown by a function form part of its API and should be appropriately documented. When raising exceptions, prefer to use the most appropriate built-in exception type. Cleanup and restorative actions can be performed using the tryfinally construct, which may optionally be used in conjunction with except blocks. Along the way, we saw that the output of the print() function can be directed to standard error using the optional file argument. Python supports the logical operators and and or for combining boolean expressions. Return codes are too easily ignored. Platform-specific actions can be implemented using an easier to ask forgiveness than permission approach facilitated by intercepting import errors and providing alternative implementations. Thanks for watching, and we'll see you in the next module.

Iterables

Introduction

Hello. My name is Robert Smallshire. Welcome to the seventh module of the Python Fundamentals course where we'll cover comprehensions, iterable objects and iterators, lazy evaluation with generators, and various tools included with Python for working with iterable objects.

List Comprehensions

Comprehensions in Python are a concise syntax for describing lists, sets, or dictionaries in a declarative or functional style. This shorthand is readable and expressive meaning that comprehensions are very effective at communicating intent to human readers. Some comprehensions almost read like natural language making them nicely self-documenting. Let's start with list comprehensions. Comprehensions are much easier to demonstrate than they are to explain, so let's bring up a Python REPL. First we'll create a list of words, "Why sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast," by splitting a string. Now comes the list comprehension. The comprehension is enclosed in square brackets just like a literal list, but instead of literal elements it contains a fragment of declarative code, which describes how to construct the elements of the list. Here the new list is formed by binding word to each value in words in turn and evaluating len(word) to create a new value. The general form of list comprehensions is expression of item for item in iterable. That is, for each item in the iterable object on the right, we evaluate the expression on the left, which is almost always, but not necessarily in terms of the item and use that as the next element of this new list. This comprehension is the declarative equivalent of the following imperative code, which uses a for loop and the list to accumulate the lengths found so far. Notice that the source object over which we iterate doesn't need to be a list. It can be any iterable object such as a tuple. The expression which is in terms of the item can be any Python expression. Here we find the number of decimal digits in each of the first 20 factorials using the range function to generate the source sequence. Note also that the type of object produced by list comprehensions is nothing more or less than a regular list.

Set Comprehensions

Set support is similar comprehension syntax using, as you might expect, curly braces instead of square brackets, and number of digits in factorial's result contain duplicates. By building a set instead, we can eliminate them, although note that the resulting set is not necessarily stored in a meaningful order since sets are unordered containers.
